

===PAGE 1===


===PAGE 2===
Judge Dredd Created by John Wagner and Carlos Ezquerra
The Roleplaying Game

===PAGE 3===
Credits
Writer
Lawrence Whitaker
Editor
Richard Ford
Layout & Graphic Design
Will Chapman
Interior Illustrations
Brian Bolland, Jason Brashill, Boo 
Cook, Carlos Ezquerra, Henry Flint, 
James Gammel, Mark Harrison, 
Frazer Irving, Jock, Cam Kennedy, 
Clint Langley, Jim Murray, David 
Roach, Cliff Robinson, Ricardo 
German Ponce Torres, Kev Walker & 
Ashley Wood
Interior Illustrations Copyright 
Rebellion Developments ltd. Used under 
licence
Cover Illustration
Neil Roberts
Borders and Box Art
Scott Clark
Special Thanks
Jonathan Oliver, Matt Smith, Jason 
Kingsley, Matthew Sprange & Joseph 
McCance
Proofreader
Nick Robinson
Playtesters
Jim Adams, Steve Alban, Pete Alix, 
Martin Costa, Chris Garland, Katrina 
Hepburn, Stuart Janssen, Cyrus 
Lendvay, Christopher Morrell, Pete 
Mujica,  Mike Rea, Nick Robinson, 
Joel Schonbrunn, Matthew Sprange, 
Sandrine Thirache, Andrew James 
Alan Welty, Warren W. Wilson, 
Gregory Wolfe & Tuesday James
Judge Dredd™ ©2009 Rebellion Developments Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduction of this work by any means without the written permission of the publisher is expressly 
forbidden. All signi ﬁ cant characters, names, places, items, art and text herein are copyrighted by Rebellion Developments Ltd. This game product contains no Open Game 
Content. No portion of this work may be reproduced in any form without written permission. To learn more about the Open Game License, please go to www.mongoosepublishing.
com. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United Kingdom and of the United States. This product is a work  of ﬁ ction. Any similarity to actual people, 
organisations, places or events is purely coincidental. Printed in the USA.

===PAGE 4===
Contents
Introduction 4
Academy Of Law 9
New Skills and Special Techniques 46
The Justice Department 54
I Am The Law! 74
Equipment  91
Megways and Skedways 121
Mega-City one 151
Thought Crimes 181
Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps 207
Robots 230
Macs Database 241
Sector 13 257
Index 269

===PAGE 5===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 6===
 Introduction
5
What Does 
This Book 
Contain?
Pages, pictures and print, clearly, but in terms of its 
organisation, the chapters are as follows:
Introduction
Which you are currently reading. The introduction provides 
an overview of Judge Dredd’s universe for beginners and 
old hands alike. 
Chapter One – Academy of Law
Creating a Judge character – everything needed to graduate from 
the toughest academy on earth and hit the streets with purpose.
Chapter Two – New Skills and 
Special Techniques
New skills and Special Techniques speciﬁ c to Judge Dredd.
Chapter Three – The Justice 
Department
The structure and workings of the Justice Department, 
including details on the separate divisions and game rules 
pertinent to sections such as Psi.
Chapter Four – I Am the Law!
Applying the law in Mega-City One – crimes, sentences and 
punishments.
Chapter Five – Equipment
Equipment – both speciﬁ c to Judges and to Mega-City One 
citizens.
Chapter Six – Megways and 
SkedWays
Vehicles of Mega-City One, plus information on the complex 
road systems running through the city.
Chapter Seven – Mega-City One 
Guided Tour
A deep-dive into the city, including details on Sectors, City 
Blocks, landmarks and a system for creating your own 
areas within Mega-City One. This chapter also provides an 
overview of the Cursed Earth and Black Atlantic.
Chapter Eight – Thought 
Crimes
Psi Division, psykers, new psionic talents and powers, and a 
range of psionic equipment.
Chapter Nine – Crazies, 
Fatties, Muties and Creeps
A guide to the different character types and crazes found 
in Mega-City One, along with game statistics and rules for 
bringing these into Judge Dredd campaigns.
Chapter Ten – Robots
Rules for creating robots and droids in the Judge Dredd 
universe, along with sample Mega-City One mechanical 
men.
Chapter Eleven – MAC’s 
Databanks
Resources for Referees – a glossary of Mega-City One 
terms and jargon; a timeline for the Judge Dredd saga and 
advice on running a Judge Dredd campaign.
Chapter Twelve – Sector 13
A detailed look at a single Sector – Sector 13 – complete with 
Sector House personalities, sector history, perps, gangs and 
plot seeds. 
The vast sprawl of Mega-City One means that crime is endemic 
and handling it a constant strain on resources. During the 21
st 
Century, as the Mega Cities developed, it became apparent 
that the old division between the state, law enforcement and 
the judicial process was simply no longer expedient or efﬁ cient: 
new ways required new means of keeping crime under control 
and punishing those that commit it.
The solution was the Judge system. Highly trained individuals 
with the power to apprehend offenders and sentence them on 
the spot, thereby massively reducing the reliance on a system 
of courts, lawyers and appeals. Concentrating such power 
into the hands of a few brought new concerns, principally 
regarding civil liberties and free speech but, generally, it was 
recognised that only justice or liberty could prevail; and, in 
the teem and madness of the Mega Cities, justice had to be 
the foremost concern. In those cities where a Judge system 
exists, the Justice Departments are the state, the judiciary, 
the legislature and the police, all wrapped into one.
And foremost amongst these Judges is Joe Dredd.

===PAGE 7===
 Introduction
6
Who Is
Judge Dredd?
6
  Introduction

===PAGE 8===
 Introduction
7
Dredd is the hardest, sternest, most effective, most dedicated 
Judge patrolling Mega-City One. His absolute passion for 
the application of justice makes him crime’s most formidable 
opponent and he embodies the unique skills and training 
all Judges possess in pursuit of justice. Dredd is, himself, 
a clone; a replication of Chief Judge Fargo, the father of the 
Judge system. He (along with his clone brother Rico) had his 
growth artiﬁ cially accelerated so that, in 2066, he emerged 
with an apparent physiological age of 5, complete with all the 
appropriate knowledge for his age computer encoded into 
his brain during the cloning process. The name Dredd was 
chosen by the genetic scientist who created him, Morton 
Judd, in order to instil fear and respect in the population. In 
every sense of the word Dredd was born to be a Judge; it is 
in his DNA and his reason for being. He was created to be 
the best and he has lived-up to that promise.
And this summation of justice in Mega-City One perfectly 
encapsulates what the Judges are about. In a city of some 
400 million people, covering much of the eastern seaboard 
of North America, order, discipline and control have to be 
enforced, ruthlessly, if civilisation is to progress. Individual 
freedoms are limited and punishment for transgressing the 
law is dealt swiftly and without much in the way of mercy.
But the Judges are not merciless. The pace of life in Mega-
City One creates a condition known as Future Shock and 
those who succumb to it are known as Futsies. The Judges 
recognise, and deal compassionately with, the strains 
the city imposes. The Judges are the fabric of Mega-City 
One, holding it together, preventing society from complete, 
devastating meltdown. Judge Dredd is the epitome of that 
fabric, woven from its cloth. He is The Law.
Who Are You?
Characters in Judge Dredd are Judges. Chapter One takes 
you through character creation and, at the end of it, you will 
have a Judge, either straight from the Academy of Law or 
a seasoned lawman who has served years on the streets. 
Later supplements for Judge Dredd will deal with playing 
citizens, mutants, aliens and, naturally enough, criminals 
(known as perps – short for perpetrators); but the focus of 
this book is four-square on the Judges.
It will be the task of you and your fellow Judges to follow in the 
footsteps of Judge Dredd, patrolling the streets, preventing 
and judging crime, handling disorder and becoming involved 
in the bizarre and unpredictable events that regularly af ﬂ ict 
a city the size of a country. You will ﬁ nd your characters 
dealing with mundane crimes such as littering, petty theft, 
mugging, vandalism and ‘slowing’ and the more bizarre 
and unique crimes such as organ-legging, umpty-bagging, 
boinging®, tapping and simping. They will encounter aliens 
– both from other planets and other dimensions – come into 
contact with powerful psions (and perhaps even be psions), 
face the undead, the walking dead and the unkillable. 
Anything and everything is possible in Mega-City One – and 
the Judges are the thin blue, black and red line that stands 
between these dangers and the normal citizens. It is one 
hell of a job.
Mega-City One
The urban sprawl that covers much of the eastern seaboard 
of North America, Mega-City One is the ﬁ rst – and largest – 
of the mega cities (Mega-City Two is located on the western 
Dredd’s dedication to the law is unswerving; to quote the man himself:
‘Where do I stand? I’ll tell you where I stand. i stand four-
square for justice. i stand for discipline, good order and the rigid 
application of the law - and grud help any limp-wristed liberals who 
say different. the people - they know where i stand. they need rules 
to live by - i provide them. they break the rules, i break them. that’s 
the way it works. the people like it that way. they need to know 
where they stand. rights? sure. i’m all for rights. but not at the 
expense of order. that’s why i like to see that statue of judgement 
standing there, towering over liberty. Kind of a symbol.’


===PAGE 9===
 Introduction
8
seaboard, spanning old California and beyond; Texas City 
covers the entire state of old Texas and, whilst not a mega 
city on the scale of the others, has a corrupt, Maﬁ a-run Judge 
system – until Dredd intervenes).
Mega-City One evolved during the 21
st Century, becoming 
an urban conurbation stretching from Boston to Washington 
in order to cope with the escalating population crisis facing 
the United States. Mega-City One was one of three major 
areas to survive the nuclear war of 2070, thanks to an 
experimental laser missile defence system built just before 
the war. Quickly spreading north and south, Mega-City One 
swelled to hold most of the population of the East Coast, 
reaching 800 million by the end of the 21
st Century. The 
Apocalypse War of 2104 effectively halved the population, 
devastating large tracts of the city; between then and 2131 
(the default year for Judge Dredd campaigns), the city has 
undergone considerable rebuilding and growth but has not 
yet reached the population peak of the pre-Apocalypse 
War era. Nuclear strikes during the Apocalypse War left a 
small part of the city, the North West Hab Zone, separated 
from the rest of the metropolis by a stretch of radioactive 
wasteland called Nuke Alley; North West Hab Zone is 
connected to the main city by a bridge but with a megway 
tunnel under construction.
Mega-City One is divided into 305 Sectors. Sectors 1 to 
300 constitute the main city, radiating out from the island 
of Manhattan. Sectors 301 to 305 form the North-West 
Hab Zone; Sector 301 is referred to by both Judges and 
citizens alike as ‘The Pit’ due to its incredibly high crime rate 
– excessive even by Mega-City One standards.
Beyond Mega-City One, inland is the radiation-blasted 
wasteland known as the Cursed Earth. Separated from 
the city by huge, weapon-guarded walls, the Cursed Earth 
is home to mutants, renegades, aliens and rejects who 
cannot – or will not – live within the mega cities. Largely 
lawless and therefore incredibly dangerous, Judges who 
have served-out their useful days have the option to take the 
Long Walk into the Cursed Earth, bringing law to the villainy 
that inhabits the rad-zones and countless shanty towns and 
ruined cities across the whole region. Despite its dangerous, 
treacherous nature, the Cursed Earth is used as a training 
ground for rookie Judges who undertake the infamous Hot 
Dog Runs to test their skills and capabilities whilst training at 
the Academy of Law.
Mega-City One receives extensive coverage in its own 
chapter.
2000 AD and Beyond
Judge Dredd is the creation of writer John 
Wagner and artist Carlos Ezquerra. He ﬁ rst 
appeared in Prog 2 of 2000 AD, Britain’s 
foremost science ﬁ ction comic and rapidly 
became the Top Thrill: Dredd’s saga continues, 
on a weekly basis, in 2000 AD’s pages, although 
the Judge Dredd Megazine and other spin-off 
titles offer additional outlets for his adventures. 
2000 AD appeared in 1977 and with barely a 
break in the saga, Judge Dredd has become 
one of the most extensive and detailed comic 
book and science ﬁ ction settings ever devised.
Dredd’s adventures, from his ﬁ rst appearance 
onwards, can be obtained as The Complete Case 
Files series, available from Rebellion.


===PAGE 10===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 11===
 Academy Of Law
10
There are, however, some differences necessary to re ﬂ ect 
the universe of Judge Dredd and Judges in general. These 
are explained below.
 Characteristics
Judges possess the standard Traveller characteristics of 
Strength, Endurance, Dexterity and Intelligence. Differences 
come in the handling of Education and Social Standing 
and the way that characteristics are decided for Judge 
characters.
Determining Characteristics
The standard Traveller method for determining characteristics 
is to roll 2d6 for each characteristic in turn. Judge Dredd 
handles things slightly differently to reﬂ ect the unique training 
and nature of the Judges.
Characteristics for Judges are: Strength, Dexterity, 
Endurance, Intelligence and Inﬂ uence (see below). Education 
and Social Standing do not receive a dice roll, as described 
in the following paragraphs.
Players should choose two of their Judge’s characteristics 
– one physical characteristic (Str, Dex or End) and either 
Inﬂ uence or Intelligence and roll these on 1d6+6. The others 
are rolled on 2d6 as normal. 
For example, a player is rolling Judge Walker; he chooses 
Dexterity and Inﬂ uence as the characteristics to beneﬁ t from 
the 1d6+6 roll but rolls Str, End and Int on 2d6, as normal.
 Education
A Judge enters the Academy of Law at the age of 5 and goes 
through 15 years of training before undergoing his ‘Full Eagle 
Day’ at the age of 20. This training creates an Edu of 10 for 
all Judges, so it is not necessary to roll 2d6 to determine its 
result. Modi ﬁ ers accrued during training will in ﬂ uence this 
base score but if a Judge emerges from the academy with 
an unmodiﬁ ed Edu characteristic, it will have a value of 10.
 Social Standing
Judges are unique in society: Social Standing, as it applies 
to most Traveller characters, does not apply to Judges. If 
Soc is necessary, all Judges are assumed to have a Soc of 
10, with people such as the Heads of Departments having 
a Soc of 11, Deputy Chief Judge 12 and Chief Judge 13. In 
most cases, Soc is not applicable: Judges are The Law.
 Influence
One characteristic Judges do require is In ﬂ uence – the 
ability for a Judge to have a commanding presence and 
manner when dealing with the myriad perps of Mega-City 
One. Consider In ﬂ uence (abbreviated to Inf) to replace 
Social Standing; it is rolled, like the standard characteristics, 
on 2d6 and will be modi ﬁ ed during training. Judges with an 
Inf score of 1-2 are very meek and perhaps better suited to 
non-street work; those with 3-5 are somewhat reticent and 
lacking in that command of authority that the best Judges 
have; 6-8 is the natural expectation for an effective Judge 
– authoritative, ﬁ rm, fair and commanding; 9-11 indicates 
Judges who command the attention and respect of those 
around them simply by showing-up; and Judges with Inf of 
12 and above are those who command absolute respect – or 
fear (such as Judge Dredd).
Inﬂ uence is used for Judges only. Everyday citizens of Mega-
City One use the standard six Traveller characteristics.
 Age and Career Terms
Your Judge character starts at the age of 5. His training is handled 
in blocks of time known as Terms. The ﬁ rst Term represents 
three years of the cadet’s training; Terms Two, Three and Four 
represent four years. After 4 Terms, when he has reached 20, 
he undergoes a ﬁ nal stretch of training which is called Full Eagle 
Day. If the Judge passes Full Eagle Day, he graduates as a 
fully-ﬂ edged Judge, ready to patrol Mega-City One.
Your Judge Dredd campaign may call for, or be better with, 
seasoned Judges. A newly graduated Judge is certainly 
equipped for life on the streets but seasoned Judges have 
the edge in terms of sheer experience. At the Referee’s 
discretion, players may take their character through up to 
two more Terms before play begins; this will produce a more 
experienced Judge in the mould of Hershey, Giant or even 
Dredd: but, remember, life on the streets of Mega-City One 
is very dangerous and going through an additional one or 
two Terms to ‘season’ your Judge may result in a fatality 
– and that means back to the Academy of Law with a wide-
eyed 5-year old juve to be trained all over again.
 Enlistment
There is no roll for enlistment or qualiﬁ cation: your character 
is automatically accepted into the Academy of Law. Also, a 
character continues through each Term unless he is either a) 
killed; or b) expelled for failing to make the grade. Either way, it 
spells the end for that particular character. A failed Judge cannot 
move into an alternative career and continue his development.
 Skills and Special Techniques
Judge Dredd introduces several new skills to Traveller, 
designed to ﬁ t the atmosphere of Dredd’s universe. It also 
introduces a set of Special Techniques; these are specialised 
skills, manoeuvres, tricks and so forth that Judges are taught 

===PAGE 12===
 Academy Of Law
11
and trained in to make them exceptional combatants and 
expert survivalists. New skills and Special Techniques are 
marked in italics in the Skill Tables and described in more 
detail in the Skills and Special Techniques chapter.
 Benefits
Judges gain no bene ﬁ ts as do other Traveller characters. 
Once graduated, every Judge receives his uniform, 
Lawmaster, Lawgiver, daystick, full eagle, armour and so 
forth. He also gains an apartment in a Justice Department-
owned block and a regular stipend to cover meals and 
general living expenses. Otherwise, he receives no other 
material or ﬁ nancial bene ﬁ ts. The Justice Department 
provides for his every need and no Judge should want for 
anything else (save those items necessary to a case or the 
occasional wad of Credits to pay an informer). Those that 
do want more tend to be the ones who go rotten – like Rico 
Dredd and Gibson – and that generally guarantees a twenty 
year stretch on Titan.
About the 
Academy
The Academy covers a massive area of Sector One of Mega-
City One – the region once known as Upper West Side in old 
New York. Within its halls are dormitories, classrooms, lecture 
theatres, gymnasiums, Sleep-Learn theatres (even whilst 
asleep, rookie Judges are fed coursework, such is the intensity 
of their preparation) and the Simulation Halls. The Sim Halls 
are life-sized recreations of some of Mega-City One’s most 
hazardous districts: in the fourth Term of training, rookies 
must demonstrate their competence in live- ﬁ re situations, 
apprehending/subduing and sentencing robot perps in order 
to hone their skills. Failure in the Sim Hall environment can 
mean serious injury or death – and rookies use, and face, live 
ammunition in these gruelling tests. But, once passed, the 
rookie is on his way to Full Eagle Day and graduation.
The Academy is staffed by human and robot tutors. The 
human contingent consists of Judges forced out of active 
service due to injury in the line of duty. Chief Judge Grif ﬁ n, 
once the Academy’s principal, is the most famous of the 
Academy’s staff – many of whom fought and died in the 
struggle against the tyrannical rule of Judge Cal. These 
Judges have countless years experience in the ﬁ eld and 
are eminently capable of passing on their knowledge to the 
Judges of tomorrow. Robot tutors focus on the standard 
academic fare: numeracy, literacy, history, geography, 
and so forth. Every rookie Judge is educated to college-
standard although the emphasis is clearly on the Law and its 
application, in addition to combat and survival skills.
Rookie Judges join at the age of 5 and that is the last they 
will see of their parents (save for the occasional Open Day or 
special exhibition) until their graduation. Once enrolled, the 
child is given over to the care of the Academy in its entirety. 
There is great prestige in entering; and proud Mega-City 
parents, saddened by the loss of a child, are comforted 
in knowing that their son or daughter is passing into the 
greatest educational establishment in the world (and the 
most dangerous).
Training 
Cycle
The training cycle for Judges follows the traditional Traveller 
format but there are some differences. (characters start as 5 
year olds, for example and the fact that no alternative career 
paths are used). The checklist is as follows:
Generation Process
Basic character generation uses the following steps:
1. Come up with a name for the character (you know he 
will be a Judge).
Survival at the 
Academy of Law
The standard approach to Traveller character 
creation is the Survival roll, made each Term, to 
see if a character gets through without injury or 
mishap. Characters failing their Survival roll are 
often forced to leave their chosen career.
Survival in Judge Dredd still exists for each Term 
but is handled somewhat differently. Failing the 
Survival roll does not automatically remove you 
from the Academy of Law – even if you roll a 
natural 2. Staying on as a Judge is determined 
by the Mishap table.
As an alternative (and if the Referee rules this 
permissible as an option), if your Judge ﬁ nds 
himself in circumstances, determined by the 
Mishap table, that would force him to leave the 
Academy, he may remain but must reduce 
one of his characteristics by 1 point. The 
characteristic to be reduced is at the 
player’s discretion.

===PAGE 13===
 Academy Of Law
12
2. Roll characteristics and determine characteristic 
modiﬁ ers. Remember that Education has a base of 10 
and Inﬂ uence replaces Social Standing. Virtually all 
Judges have a Soc of 10.
3. Receive your basic training for the Term.
4. In Term Three, your Judge has the opportunity to specialise. 
You will decide that specialisation in that term. 
5. Choose skills and training tables for this Term and make 
rolls as directed for that Term. 
 a. Roll for Survival for this term.
 b. If you succeed, go to Step 6.
 c. If you did not succeed, then events may have forced 
you from this career. Roll on the Mishap table, then 
go to Step 3 for your next four-year Term. Optionally, 
establish a Connection with another player character.
6. a. Roll for Events.
 b. Optionally, establish a Connection with another player 
character.
Then return to Step 3 and continue until you have completed 
four Terms. At the end of Term Four, complete the Full Eagle 
Day procedure to see how (and if) your Judge graduates.
Finally, if seasoned Judges are being used, take your Judge 
through one or two Terms, as agreed by the Referee, of the 
Seasoned Judge procedure – rolling for Survival, Mishaps 
and Events, just as you have before.
 Events and  Untrained Skills
Throughout your time at the Academy of Law, you will 
experience all manner of events which will inevitably test 
your skills. Many of the skills tested will be ones your Judge 
has trained in but some will be in skills you have not yet 
developed. The standard Traveller procedure is to apply a 
–3 DM to rolls where a character uses an untrained skill; 
for the purposes of Judge Dredd, this is handled a little 
differently. If you character is called upon to roll using a skill 
he does not already have, at level 0 or higher, choose one of 
the following resolution methods:
• Treat the roll as though your Judge has level 0 in the 
skill, thereby avoiding the –3 DM. Trainee Judges have 
all sorts of resources, including robot tutors, simulation 
programmes and other mechanisms to help develop his 
learning capabilities. For the purposes of training at the 
Academy of Law, these resources can be called upon 
to help attain success.
Or Alternatively...
• You may make your roll with the untrained skill, taking 
the –3 DM as per standard Traveller procedure. If you 
do this and succeed in the roll, then you gain that skill at 
level 0. Subsequent instances of the skill will increase it 
by one level each time.
The resolution method you choose must be stated in 
advance; you cannot change to the other method if things 
go against you.
 ‘By Grud, you’re a 
little advanced for 
your age, aren’t you?’
Astute readers will have noticed that creating a 
5 year old trainee Judge is exactly the same as 
creating an 18-year old Traveller character, in that 
2d6 is rolled for the characteristics. Why is this?
There are two reasons. The ﬁ rst is sheer 
expedience; better to keep the character creation 
system as simple as possible rather than work 
out realistic but perhaps lengthy mechanisms for 
aging from childhood, through teens and puberty 
and into early adulthood.
The second reason, which sounds more like an 
excuse but is actually part of the design thinking, 
is that the characteristics rolled now, whilst the 
character is at such a young age, reﬂ ect the potential 
the Judges at the Academy of Law recognise in 
the entrance assessments and can accurately 
forecast, chart and grow. Judges are trained to be 
razor-sharp, lightning-fast and hard-as-hell: only by 
understanding, realising and growing that potential, 
can the Academy be certain of turning out top-notch 
Judges each year.
The characteristics you roll for that 5 year 
old represent the man (or woman) he (or 
she) is destined to be...

===PAGE 14===
 Academy Of Law
13
 Term One
Term One represents the ﬁ rst three years and the formative 
stages of the ﬂ edgling Judge’s life with the Law. Schooling 
is the focus: literacy, numeracy, creative play and cognitive 
reasoning. For the ﬁ rst three years every child in the 
Academy is studied, monitored, nurtured and coached. 
Ideas are planted; hard knocks are introduced. The tutor 
robots offer sympathy; the human Judges offer reality: begin 
to think, feel and act like a Judge and you will be a Judge.
Basic Training
All characters gain the following skills: Athletics (any) 1, 
Melee (unarmed combat) 1, Survival 1.
Skills
Specialisations are not selected as part of Term One. The 
available tables are below.
Term One Skills and Training 
(Roll on ONE of the tables this Term)
Roll
Personal 
Development Skills
Special 
Techniques
1 +1 Str Street 
Perception
Crowd Control
2 +1 Dex Law Perp Sense
3 +1 End Leadership Control Crash
4 +1 Int Stealth Combat Acuity
5 +1 Inf Investigate Sixth Sense
6 Jack of All Trades Melee 
(bludgeon)
Recovery
Survival
Roll 4+ on 2d6. You may add your highest characteristic DM 
to this roll.
Failing Survival at this stage does not necessarily get the 
character ejected from the Academy. A roll on the Mishap 
table is necessary and that determines if the character stays 
or goes.

===PAGE 15===
 Academy Of Law
14
Mishap
If your Judge fails his Survival roll for this Term, roll on the Mishap table, below and apply the effects.
Mishap
2d6 Mishap
2 You are severely wounded during basic combat training. The Academy medics make you feel better but you still have to 
leave the Academy. Still, you get to go back to your family and you have missed your toys. You much prefer toy guns to 
the real thing.
3 It is hard work learning all the things Judges have to know. Roll Int 6+ to successfully pass your end of term exams. If you 
fail, you have to leave the Academy; you should have paid more attention!
4 You feel very homesick and want to see your family badly. The Judges talk to you sternly about continuing with your 
training. If you can roll End 6+, then the Judges let you see your parents for an hour and that makes you feel better. You 
continue your training. If you fail, it is obvious you are not cut out for being a Judge and you return to your family. Daddy is 
upset but he will get over it.
5 Bullies in the dormitory pick on you. Roll Inf 8+. If you succeed, you stand up to them and they back-down. If you fail, they 
keep picking on you and you gain one of them as an Enemy.
6 One of the other cadets likes to play practical jokes and you get the blame. The Head of the Academy demands to know 
if you are the culprit. Roll Int 8+. If you succeed, you understand that you are in training to become a Judge and must 
always tell the truth, so you identify the boy who really played the tricks. You gain the Advocate skill at 0. If you fail the roll, 
you take the blame and are punished. Roll End 8+. If you succeed, you take your punishment like a Judge should and 
gain Inf +1. If you fail you are mocked by the other cadets for failing to take the punishment on the chin and lose 1 Inf.
7 During combat practice you injure another cadet although you did not mean to hit him so hard with the practice daystick. 
You gain that cadet as a Rival but gain Melee (bludgeon) 1.
8 You have trouble with one of the skills taught during Basic Training. Choose one Basic Training skill. This skill will stay at  
level 0 when you next come to improve it but will increase to level 1 on the third improvement, if you get the opportunity.
9 You are not good at physical training. Pick one from Str, Dex or End. If you roll for an improvement of that characteristic 
on the Personal Development table, it stays as it is – although if you get the chance to improve it after that, it will increase.
10 You commit some misdemeanour that gets you into serious trouble with the Academy Judges. Roll Inf 8+ and note the 
Effect:
5-6: Your recklessness has shown initiative. Gain an additional roll on the Skills table
3-4: You are admonished for your actions but have displayed remorse. Roll on the Personal Development table.
1-2: The Judges will be keeping an eye on you as a potential troublemaker. There are no further repercussions
0: You are punished for your actions. Your Survival roll for Term Two will suffer a –1 DM.
–1-–2: You are in deep trouble; roll Int 6+ to explain yourself. If you succeed, then your Survival roll for Term Two will 
suffer a –1 DM. If you fail, you are expelled from the Academy.
–3 or less: You are automatically expelled.
11 You are injured during training. Roll on the Injury table on page 37 of the Traveller rules but you remain at the Academy.
12 You are injured during training. Roll on the Injury table on page 37 of the Traveller rules but you remain at the Academy 
as long as you can successfully roll Inf 8+.
Events
Every character gains a roll on the Events table.
Events
d66 Event
11 Disaster! Roll on the Mishap table but remain in the Academy.
12 Your physical training aptitude is excellent. Gain a level of Athletics (co-ordination).

===PAGE 16===
 Academy Of Law
15
13 You show an aptitude for unarmed combat. Gain a level of Melee (unarmed).
14 You display leadership qualities. Gain a level of Leadership.
15 It is clear you are a born survivor. Gain a level of Survival.
16 Your physical training aptitude is excellent. Gain 1 level of Athletics (endurance).
21 You hone your ability to sneak around. Gain 1 level of Stealth.
22 Working with the robot tutors day-in, day-out hones your persuasiveness skills. Gain Persuade 0.
23 Roll Dex 8+. If you succeed, your natural agility is noticed and developed. Gain a level of Athletics. If you fail the roll, your tutors 
decide that you need further physical development next Term; you will gain one extra roll, if you Survive Term Two successfully, 
on the Personal Development table.
24 You become very friendly with one of your fellow cadets. Gain an Ally.
25 It is clear that you have an aptitude for geography. Gain 1 level in Mega-City One Geography.
26 Your physical training aptitude is excellent. Gain 1 level of Athletics (strength).
31 It is clear you are a budding marksman. You gain 1 level of Gun Combat (Lawgiver).
32 You have a clear talent with the use of the daystick. Gain Melee (bludgeon) at 0.
33 You impress one of your human tutors with your attitude and diligence. He becomes a Contact.
34 Your ability to spot lawbreakers is astonishing. Gain a level of Street Perception.
35 It is clear that you have an aptitude for history. Gain Mega-City One History at 0.
36 You are a natural in the saddle of the Lawmaster. Gain a level in Drive (Lawmaster).
41 You demonstrate a natural af ﬁ nity for computers. Gain Computers 0.
42 During general training, it is clear that you may have psionic potential. You must test for psionics by rolling 2d6 and applying 
your Int DM. If the result is 11+, you are psionic and Psionic Strength is determined as per page 152 of the Traveller Core 
Rulebook. Your training in Term Two will be as normal but in Term Three you may transfer into the Psi Branch and continue 
your training to become a Psi Judge.
43 Plainly you are very comfortable with the everyday people of Mega-City One. Gain Streetwise 0.
44 Your smooth-talking skills come to the attention of both your robot and human tutors. Gain either Advocate 0 or Diplomat 0.
45 You excel at paperwork and demonstrate an admiration for tedious bureaucracy. Gain Admin 0 but lose 1 point of Inf.
46 Although your skill with a Lawgiver will need re ﬁ nement, you display an aptitude for the Judge’s riﬂ e, the Scattergun. Gain Gun 
Combat (shotgun) 0.
51 Cadet Judges are taught a wide variety of sports as part of physical training. Gain one of the following: Str +1, Dex +1 or Flyer 
(personal) 0. 
52 You show a deﬁ  nite talent for understanding the Mega-City One legal system. Gain a level of Law.
53 When another cadet is injured in training, you are ﬁ rst on the scene and somehow do all the right things to stop the bleeding 
and keep them alive. Gain Medic 0 (and an Ally in the form of the cadet you helped).
54 During general training it is clear that you have a clear aptitude for all things technical. You gain one of the following: Comms 0, 
Computers 0, Engineer 0, Mechanic 0, Remote Operations 0 or Sensors 0. Your training in Term Two will be as normal but in 
Term Three you will be automatically transferred into the Tek Branch and continue your training to become a Tek Judge.
55 You are chosen for training in a Special Technique, Gain a roll on the Special Techniques table. If the result is a technique you 
already have, re-roll the result.
56 In your studies you show a real talent for science. Gain any Science skill (Physical, Life, Social or Space) at 0.
61 You help a fellow cadet out of a tough situation. Gain an Ally.
62 During general training it is clear that your character displays some unusual quirks. You gain one of the following: Admin 0, 
Broker 0, Carouse 0, Deception 0, Gambler 0 or Persuade 0.
63 You ﬁ  nd a lecture given by the Chief Judge inspirational. Gain one from either Diplomat, Law or Leadership.
64 You form a deep friendship with 1d6 other cadets and pledge to help and defend each other to the bitter end, no matter what 
you do. Gain that number of Allies.
65 You beneﬁ  t highly from sleep training. Gain Int +1.
66 You emerge as top of your class in the Term One exams. You gain a special commendation from the Head of the Academy 
and you gain an additional roll on any of the Term Two skill tables, next Term.
d66 Event

===PAGE 17===
 Academy Of Law
16
 Term Two
Term Two sees the start of rigorous training begin in 
earnest. The focus is on developing the key skills for Judges 
in combat, application of the law and developing Special 
Techniques. Cadets are expected to be showing maturity 
and independence in their decision making and grasping 
how sentencing, clemency and leniency operate when 
dealing with criminals and crime.
Basic Training
All characters gain a level in the following skills: Drive 
(Lawmaster), Gun Combat (Lawgiver), Law, Mega-City One 
Geography, Street Perception.
Skills
Judges gain two rolls this Term; one roll on either the 
Personal Development OR Special Techniques table; and 
one roll on the Skills table – along with any additional rolls 
granted by Term One events.
Term Two Personal 
Development and Special 
Techniques
(roll once on either of these tables)
Roll
Personal 
Development Special Techniques
1 +1 Str Data Access
2 +1 Dex Dead Halt
3 +1 End Crowd Control
4+ 1  I n t Formidable Presence
5+ 1  I n f Combat Acuity
6 Jack of All Trades Rapid Aim
Term Two Skills 
(roll once on this table, in addition to Personal Development 
or Special Techniques)
Roll Skill
1 Advocate or Law
2 Athletics (any), Gun Combat (any) or Melee (any).
3 Comms or Computers
4 Drive (any) or Street Lore. If you choose Street 
Lore, roll 1d6: 
1: Carouse, 2: Deception, 3: Persuasion, 4: Street 
Perception, 5: Streetwise, 6: Survival
5 Stealth or Persuade
6 Tactics or Leadership
Survival
Roll 5+ on 2d6. You may add your highest characteristic DM 
to this roll.
Cadets are subjected to their ﬁ rst live ammunition simulations and 
frequent sim trials in the Academy’s mock-up of Mega-City One 
streets. The tactics of famous Judges like Dredd, Fargo, Hershey 
and Giant are studied so that cadets can learn from the greats.

===PAGE 18===
 Academy Of Law
17
Mishap
If your Judge fails his Survival roll for this Term, roll on the Mishap table, below and apply the effects.
Mishap 
2d6 Mishap
2 Killed during training.
3 Severely injured. Roll twice on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook , page 37) and take the lowest result. To 
remain in the Academy, roll End+Inf 8+; otherwise you are forced to leave.
4 An exercise in the Sim Hall goes badly wrong. Roll 1d6:
1: Severely injured. Roll twice on the Injury table (Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the lowest result. 
2: You are injured. Roll once on the Injury table (Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37). 
3: You shoot and kill another cadet. Roll Inf 8+ to prove it was an unfortunate accident and convince the Academy 
Principal that you should remain in training. If you fail, leave the Academy.
4: You shoot and seriously injure another cadet. Roll Inf 7+ to prove it was an unfortunate accident and convince the 
Academy Principal that you should remain in training. If you fail, leave the Academy. If you succeed, roll 1d6; on a 
result of 1-4, the cadet you injured bears no hard feelings. On a result of 5-6, you gain that cadet as an Enemy.
5: You are concussed and spend several days in the med-bay undergoing brain scans. Reduce Int, Dex or one skill 
by 1 as a result of the concussion.
6: Your recklessness does not impress others and you are reprimanded. Lose 1 Inf.
5 High spirits lead to a carpeting before the Principal. Roll Inf 8+ to avoid punishment. If you fail, roll 1d6 to ﬁ nd how you are 
punished. 1-2: Go back and re-sit Term One training again. If you gain any new skills, you keep them. If you gain any of the 
same skills, ignore them. 3-5: You are given a public dressing-down. Lose 1 Inf. 6:You forfeit one skill roll for this Term.
6 Injured during training. Roll twice on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the highest result.
7 You are struggling in certain areas academically. Roll Int 7+ to apply yourself. If you fail, you are removed from the 
Academy. If you succeed gain a +1 DM to your Survival roll for next term.
8 One of your fellow cadets resents your success. Gain a Rival.
9 A fellow cadet gets into dif ﬁ culties during training. Roll Survival 8+ to help him. If you succeed, gain him as an Ally. If 
you fail, he blames you for the injuries or humiliation he suffers; gain an Enemy.
10 Your grasp of the law is shaky and you do not do well in the constant tests of your knowledge. The next time you gain 
a skill roll, do not roll randomly but take Law automatically, to reﬂ ect the extra hours you need to put into study.
11 You start to feel disillusioned with the Academy. Too many of your fellow cadets have been injured, burned-out, 
harassed, bullied or humiliated. Roll Int 7+ successfully or leave the Academy for an easier life elsewhere.
12 You are injured. Roll on the Injury table on page 37 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
Events
Every character gains a roll on the Events table.
Events
d66 Event
11 Disaster! Roll on the Mishap table but remain in the Academy.
12 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 Str. 
13 You demonstrate an aptitude for handling vehicles. Gain a level in one of the following: Drive (any) or Flyer (any)
14 One of the older cadets takes you under his wing after you assist him with a particular academic problem he has been 
having. Gain an Ally.
15 You take special classes in how the law needs to be applied in civil, as opposed to domestic, situations. Gain a level of Advocate.
16 One of the younger cadets is being bullied by one of the robot tutors for no good reason that you can see. You can report 
this matter to the Head of Robot Tuition; if you choose to do this, roll Inf 8+ to convince him of the robot’s malfunction. If you 
succeed, gain a level of Advocate. If you fail, the bullying continues and you know you are powerless to do anything.
Alternatively you can attempt to confront the robot yourself. If you do, roll either Int 8+ or Persuasion 8+ to convince the 
robot that it is acting in a malfunctioning manner. If you succeed, the robot rolls off to have its impartiality circuits adjusted: 
gain Mechanic 0. If you fail, the robot ignores your accusations and ﬁ les an adverse report against you.
Whatever you do, the bullied cadet recognises your attempts to help. Gain an Ally.

===PAGE 19===
 Academy Of Law
18
21 You are selected for a fact- ﬁ nding ﬁ eld trip to another Mega-City. Roll 1d6 to determine which one:
1: Brit-Cit, 2: Ciudad Barranquilla, 3: Luna City, 4: Mega-City Two, 5: Murphyville, 6: Oz
You gain a Contact in one of these mega cities and gain an additional roll on the Term Two Skill table.
22 Undertake rigorous gymnastic training. Gain +1 Dex.
23 During general training it is clear that you have a clear aptitude for all things technical. You gain one of the following: 
Comms 1, Computers 1, Engineer 1, Mechanic 1, Remote Operations 1 or Sensors 1. Your training in Term Two will 
be as normal but in Term Three you will be automatically transferred into the Tek Branch and continue your training to 
become a Tek Judge.
24 You excel in understanding how crowds and mobs behave. Gain the Crowd Control Special Technique.
25 You are singled-out for rigorous gymnastics training. Gain a level of Athletics (co-ordination).
26 The focus of this term is on the Law of the Mega-City One. Gain a level of Law.
31 Your reﬂ  exes are good. Gain the Combat Acuity Special Technique.
32 Undertake rigorous endurance training. Gain +1 End.
33 An argument with a fellow cadet means you are challenged to a ﬁ ght for your honour and standing. If you refuse, reduce your 
Inf by 1 but gain a level of Law. If you accept, roll Melee (unarmed) 10+. If you succeed, gain +1 Inf. If you fail, roll on the Injury 
table and reduce your Inf by one. Either way, gain one from: Melee (unarmed), Leadership, Tactics or Deception.
34 You have a real talent for working the streets. Gain a level in one of the following: Carouse, Deception, Persuasion, Street 
Perception, Streetwise or Survival.
35 You take additional classes in using the standard sidearm of the Judge. Gain a level of Gun Combat (Lawgiver).
36 During general training, it is clear that you may have psionic potential. You must test for psionics by rolling 2d6 and applying 
your Int DM. If the result is 11+, you are psionic and Psionic Strength is determined as per page 152 of the Traveller Core 
Rulebook. Your training in Term Two will be as normal but in Term Three you may transfer to the Psi Branch and continue 
your training to become a Psi Judge. If you rolled this event during Term One, you may re-roll on the Event table.
41 You are given advanced training in a specialist ﬁ eld. Throw Int 8+ to gain any one skill. Choose from any of the skill tables 
in this chapter.
42 Undertake rigorous mental training. Gain +1 Int.
43 You go on a tour of the city, visiting several sectors. Gain 1d3 Contacts and a level of either Mega-City One Geography 
or Mega-City One History.
44 You ﬁ  nd you can turn your hand to most things. Gain a level of Jack of All Trades.
45 You undertake general weapons training. Gain a level of Gun Combat (any)
46 The focus of this term is on the Law of the Mega-City One. Gain a level of Law.
51 You have the opportunity to study an alien brought into the Academy for educational purposes. Gain Science 
(sophontology)
52 Undertake rigorous personality training. Gain +1 Inf.
53 You display considerable tactical knowledge. Gain a level of Tactics.
54 A ﬁ eld trip into the Cursed Earth goes wrong when the band of cadets is attacked by mutants. Roll End+Gun Combat 10+. 
If you fail, you are wounded. Roll on the Injury table on page 37 of the Traveller Core Rulebook. If you succeed, gain a 
Special Technique of your choice. Either way, gain a level of Survival.
55 You take additional classes in information technology. Gain a level of Computers.
56 It is clear you have an engaging personality. Gain a level of Persuade.
61 You spend time studying the history or geography of Mega-City One. Gain a level in either Mega-City One History or 
Mega-City One Geography.
62 You study communications technology as part of classes on electronic surveillance. Gain a level of Comms.
63 You are chosen for training in a Special Technique. Gain a roll on the Special Techniques table. If you roll for a technique 
you already have, re-roll the result.
64 In your studies you show a real talent for science. Gain any Science skill (Physical, Life, Social or Space) at 0.
65 Anti-Child Oppression Campaigners storm the Academy of Law and the tutors and cadets are forced to repel them. 
Roll End 9+. If you fail, roll on the Injury table of page 37 of the Traveller Core Rulebook. Either way, you gain valuable 
experience. Roll on any of the Term Two skill tables.
66 You emerge as top of your class in the Term Two exams. You gain a special commendation from the Head of the 
Academy and you gain an additional roll on any of the Term Three skill tables, next Term.

===PAGE 20===
 Academy Of Law
19
 Term Three
Term Three sees two additional aspects added to the 
cadets’ training. The ﬁ rst is the Hot Dog Run – a mandatory 
trip into the Cursed Earth to test the cadet’s skills, tenacity 
and to educate him in the hellish wilderness beyond the 
conﬁ nes of the city walls. Term Three is also the beginning 
of specialisations. Cadets, if eligible, can choose to be 
streamed into one of the following specialist training areas: 
Street Judges, Psi Division, Tek or Med.
If your Judge has already been identi ﬁ ed as moving into 
one of these branches in a Term One or Two event, then 
your Judge will know which area he is to specialise in. If not, 
follow the below procedure:
1. Test for Psionics. Roll 2d6. If the result is 11+, the 
character is psionic and Psionic Strength is determined 
as per page 152 of the Traveller Core Rulebook. Your 
Judge may move into the Psi Division Specialisation if 
he so chooses. If you fail, go to step 2.
2. If your character has Int 9+ and/or Computers, Engineer 
or Mechanic, he may specialise as a Tek Judge.
3. If your character has Dex 9+ and/or Medic he may 
specialise as a Med Judge. 
4. All other Judges are Street Judges.
Basic Training
Characters gain basic training skills based on their stream, 
as follows:
Street Judges: Gain a level of Gun Combat (Lawgiver), gain a 
level of Drive (Lawmaster), gain a level of Law, Melee (bludgeon) 1.
Psi Division : Gain one Psionic Talent, chosen by the 
Judge, from any of the Talents, Basic or Advanced, found in 
the Thought Crimes chapter.
Tek Judges: Gain a level of Computers, gain a level of 
Engineer (any), gain a level of Mechanic.
Med Judges: Gain a level of Medic, gain Social Sciences 
(psychology) 1, gain Physical Sciences (biology) 1.
Survival
Roll 7+ on 2d6. You may add your highest characteristic DM 
to this roll, plus any DMs for your specialisation, as follows:
Street Judges: Gun Combat or Melee
Psi Judges: Psionic Strength
Tek Judges: Mechanics or Engineer
Med Judges: Medic or Computers

===PAGE 21===
 Academy Of Law
20
Skills
Personal Development, Special Techniques and Skills are determined by the tables for your career stream.
Street Judges Skills and Training 
(Roll on ONE of the tables this Term)
Roll Personal Development Skills Special Techniques
1 +1 Str Gun Combat (any) Crowd Control
2 +1 Dex Medic Formidable Presence
3 +1 End Streetwise Combat Acuity
4 +1 Int Street Perception Rapid Aim
5 +1 Inf Investigate Track Perp
6 Jack of All Trades Leadership Recovery


===PAGE 22===
 Academy Of Law
21
Psi Judges Skills and Training 
(Roll on ONE of the tables this Term)
Roll Personal Development Skills Special Techniques
1 +1 Str Gun Combat (any) Enhanced Power
2 +1 Dex Medic Dead Zone
3 +1 Psi Additional Psionic Talent Enhanced Talent
4 +1 Int Investigate Formidable Presence
5 +1 Inf Life Sciences (psioncology) Sixth Sense
6 +1 to your Basic Training Psi Talent Additional Advanced Psionic Talent Recovery


===PAGE 23===
 Academy Of Law
22
Tek Judges Skills and Training 
(Roll on ONE of the tables this Term)
Roll Personal Development Skills Special Techniques
1 +1 Int Computers Rapid Assessment
2 +1 Dex Engineer (electronics) Steady Hand
3 +1 Dex Mechanic Data Access
4 +1 Int Remote Operations Jerry-Rig
5 +1 Inf Sensors Oh, So That’s What it Does...
6 Jack of All Trades Physical Sciences (any) Sixth Sense


===PAGE 24===
 Academy Of Law
23
Med Judges Skills and Training 
(Roll on ONE of the tables this Term)
Roll Personal Development Skills Special Techniques
1 +1 Str Admin Perp Sense
2 +1 Dex Computers Sixth Sense
3 +1 End Life Sciences (any) Track Perp
4 +1 Int Medic Life Saver
5 +1 Inf Investigate Rapid Diagnosis
6 Jack of All Trades Jack of All Trades Recovery


===PAGE 25===
 Academy Of Law
24
Mishap
If your Judge fails his Survival roll for this Term, roll on the appropriate Mishap table, below and apply the effects.
Street Judge Mishap 
2d6 Mishap
2 Killed during training
3 Severely injured. Roll twice on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the lowest result. To 
remain in the Academy, roll End+Inf 8+; otherwise you are forced to leave.
4 To pass a Sim Hall exercise you ﬁ nd a way to bend the rules in your favour. Roll Int 10+ or Deception 10+. If you 
succeed, you get away with it. If you fail you are hauled before the Principal and forced to explain your actions. 
Roll Int+Tactics 8+; if you succeed, you successfully show that you used initiative and exploited a ﬂ aw in the 
testing process. If you fail, you are expelled from the Academy.
5 You take part in a Lawmaster control exercise where a dangerous manoeuvre is called for. Roll Drive (Lawmaster) 
8+. If you succeed, you pull-off the manoeuvre with aplomb and gain a level in Drive (Lawmaster). If you fail, roll 
twice on the Injury table (Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the lowest result. You do, however, remain 
at the Academy.
6 Interrogation tuition involves the live interrogation of a real-life perp. Roll Inf 8+ with DMs for Persuasion. If 
you succeed, you extract a full confession from the perp and gain Interrogation 1. If you fail, the perp makes a 
mockery of your clumsy attempts to intimidate him; lose 1 Inf.
7 As part of your studies you must focus on the Robot War, studying all the vid-records, tri-dees and other 
documents. Judges who fought against Call-Me-Kenneth and his robots offer ﬁ rst-hand testimony of the madness 
of the time. Roll End 8+. If you succeed, gain a level in Mega-City One History. If you fail, you gain a life-long 
hatred and distrust of all robots, including your robotic tutors.
8 A Sim Hall robot exercise involving the apprehension of a ﬂ eeing perp, who has just killed a citizen during a street 
robbery, leaves you with no choice but to shoot the perp in the back as he ignores your commands to halt. Roll 
End 8+. If you succeed, you shoot the perp without hesitation; there is no doubt that, in real life, he would have 
killed again.
If you fail, the robot perp escapes and you are called before the Principal who questions your commitment to 
justice. Roll Inf 8+ to convince him that this was a momentary lapse of reason and will not happen again. If you 
succeed, you remain at the Academy. If you fail, you are expelled.
9 You study the history of Mega-City One crime down the ages. Roll End 8+ to avoid developing an irrational hatred 
of one of the following (roll 2d6):
2: Aliens (especially Kleggs), 3: Bank Robbers, 4: Boingers®, 5: Corrupt Judges, 6: Fatties, 7: Judge Killers, 8: 
Murderers, 9: Muties, 10: Organ Leggers, 11: Futsies, 12: Terrorists
When dealing with the object of your hatred you must successfully roll Int 8+ to avoid acting with bias when 
applying Law rolls to this group. If you fail, your prejudice impairs your ability to apply the law correctly. All Law 
skill rolls will be at –2. If you rolled Corrupt Judges, you may roll Inf 11+ if you so choose. If successful, you can, 
on graduating, apply to join the SJS.
10 You fail to apply the law in an appropriate way during a training exercise. Roll Law 8+ to immediately rectify your 
mistake. If you succeed, you pass the test. If you fail, you are called before the Principal who questions your 
commitment to justice. Roll Inf 8+ to convince him that this was a momentary lapse of reason and will not happen 
again. If you succeed, you remain at the Academy. If you fail, you are expelled.
11 You suspect that one of your tutors is engaged in corruption. Report him and gain him as an Enemy, even though 
an internal investigation ﬁ nds little to support your suspicions.
Alternatively, roll Investigate 8+ to gain further evidence. Add the Effect of your roll to a Law 8+ roll. If the Law roll 
succeeds you are able to prove your suspicions to the Principal: gain an additional skill roll from the Term Three 
skills. If you fail, you gain the tutor as an Enemy. You have to explain your conduct to the Principal but he accepts 
that you were attempting to uncover potential corruption. You lose 1 Inf but remain at the Academy.
12 You are injured. Roll on the Injury table on page 37 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.

===PAGE 26===
 Academy Of Law
25
Psi Judge Mishap
2d6 Mishap
2 Severely injured. Roll twice on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the lowest result. To 
remain in the Academy, roll Psi+Inf 8+; otherwise you are forced to leave.
3 You suffer Psionic Backlash as a result of strenuous psionic activity. Gain 2 levels of Psionic Trauma
4 An exercise goes horribly wrong, threatening your career at the Academy. Roll Psi 8+. If you fail, roll twice on the 
Injury table, taking the lower result. You gain an Enemy but also +1 to any skill or Talent you choose.
5 Your abilities are called into question. Roll Psi 8+ to convince colleagues and superiors of your powers. If you 
fail, you must leave the Academy.
6 An exercise results in you using your psionic powers overzealously. Gain +1 to any trained Talent but also gain 
1 Rival from amongst your fellow Psi Cadets.
7 You suffer from a psychological disorder. Reduce your Psi Strength by 1
8 You suffer from a life-threatening illness. Reduce your Endurance by 1.
9 Your own powers terrify you. You do not use them unless you can absolutely help it. In times of stress you must 
roll Endurance 8+ to retain this self-control.
10 You succumb to a destructive vice as a way of coping with your powers. Roll 1d6:
1: Addiction to Umpty Candy, 2: Addiction to Comic Books, 3: Gambling for the highest possible stakes, 4: 
Reckless, self-destructive behaviour, 5: Smoking, 6: Over-eating – you gain considerable weight.
You must regularly and secretly, fulﬁ l your urges or suffer a negative DM to skills. Your Referee will decide the 
intensity of the penalty and for how long.
11 Psionically injured. Gain 1 level of Psionic Trauma (see page 197).
12 You are injured. Roll on the Injury table on page 37 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
Tek Judge Mishap 
2d6 Mishap
2 Severely injured. Roll twice on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the lowest result. To 
remain in the Academy, roll End+Inf 8+; otherwise you are forced to leave.
3 A project to build a unique machine or device goes awry; the machine malfunctions, runs amok, blows-up or something 
else contrary to what it was meant to do. Roll Int+Mechanic 8+ to explain away the accident or lose 1 Inf.
4 As part of your studies you must focus on the Robot War, studying all the vid-records, tri-dees and other 
documents. Judges who fought against Call-Me-Kenneth and his robots offer ﬁ rst-hand testimony of the madness 
of the time. Roll End 8+. If you succeed, gain Space Sciences (robotics) 0. If you fail, you gain a life-long hatred 
and distrust of all robots, including your robotic tutors.
5 All Tek Judges are exposed to ﬂ ying in a ﬂ ight simulator. Roll End 8+. If you succeed, you ﬁ nd the experience 
exhilarating; gain Flyer (any) 0. If you fail, the experience is horrible and you are left with an acute fear of ﬂ ying. 
Any time you are faced with going in an aircraft of any kind, you must throw End 8+ to steel yourself. Otherwise 
you have to be sedated for the whole trip, a process which gives you a –2 DM to all skills for 1d6 hours after the 
sedative has worn-off.
6 Through your studies you decide that the old tools (manual screwdrivers, hammers, pliers and so forth) are the 
best way of getting good results. You shun the use of 22
nd Century advanced tools in favour of antiques from 
the 19th, 20th and 21st Centuries. Your skills are unaffected but accomplishing a task takes you twice as long as 
someone using modern tools.
7 You gain an irrational fear and loathing for a particular type of technology. When dealing with this technology 
your skills suffer a –2 DM. Roll 1d6 to determine what it is you fear: 1: Alien technology, 2: Bombs/Explosives, 
3: Computers, 4: Robots, 5: Antique Vehicles, 6: Any two of the above
8 You ﬁ nd yourself easily distracted when working on a task. Either cure this by taking the Steady Hand Special Technique 
in lieu of your next skill roll, or suffer a –2 DM whenever you are working on Tek assignments with others around you.
9 Become an obsessive bore about one piece of technology. At every available opportunity you talk, ad-nauseum, about 
your obsession, especially when allowed to work on the item you love so much. Roll 1d6 to determine what it is: 1: Alien 
technology, 2: Bombs/Explosives, 3: Computers, 4: Robots, 5: Antique Vehicles, 6: Any two of the above 
10 You develop a deep loathing of Futsies, even though you know this is a medical condition that requires patience 
and sympathy. Whenever faced with a Futsie, you ﬂ y into a rage unless you can roll End 8+.
11 You are incredibly impatient with anyone who cannot grasp the simplicities of advanced Mega-City science. 
Anyone who fails to display an interest in technology of any kind gets a ﬁ erce reprimand unless you can hold 
your tongue by rolling End 8+.
12 You are injured. Roll on the Injury table on page 37 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.

===PAGE 27===
 Academy Of Law
26
Med Judge Mishap 
2d6 Mishap
2 Severely injured. Roll twice on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the lowest result. To 
remain in the Academy, roll End+Inf 8+; otherwise you are forced to leave.
3 You begin to suspect that you might be developing criminal tendencies as a result of studying the criminal mind. 
Roll Inf 8+. If you succeed, you realise this is all in your mind; you are one of the good guys. If you fail, you are 
compelled to hand yourself over to the SJS; leave the Academy.
4 Your training involves the study of mutation. As a result you become sympathetic to the plight of mutants who 
are banned from Mega-City One. In the future, when faced with any mutant, you will act in a sympathetic manner 
towards his condition, irrespective of what he has done or any crime committed.
5 Your training involves human dissection. Roll End 8+. If you succeed, there are no ill effects. If you fail, you gain 
an unhealthy interest and obsession with the internal workings of the human body. You become visibly more 
animated whenever you are in the vicinity of injuries that expose the innards of the victim and delight in the 
rigours of operations and invasive surgery.
6 During a series of medical experiments you are accidentally exposed to something unpleasant that may infect 
you if you fail a roll of End 8+. If you are infected, roll once on the Injury table. The infection or disease may also 
re-occur at some point in the future; your Referee will decide when but when it does strike you will have to roll 
End 8+ to shake off its effects. Roll 1d6 to see what effect that will be:
1: Bed-ridden for 1d6 days.
2: Become prone to headaches for 2d6 hours, suffering –1 to all skills.
3: Subject to nausea causing vomiting and the shakes that last for 1d6 minutes; you can do nothing during such 
attacks.
4: Double vision and dizziness lasting 1d6 hours. –2 to all skills.
5: Flu-like symptoms; coughing, sneezing and hot ﬂ ushes. –1 to all skills for 1d3 days.
6: Bed-ridden for 3d6 days.
7 You develop the urge to play practical jokes; this gets you into constant trouble with the tutors. Roll Stealth 8+ or 
Deception 8+ to avoid being caught. If you are, you are forced to re-sit Term Two in its entirety before going onto 
Term Four. If you gain any new skills, you may keep them. But if you receive the same skill as one you already 
have, it does not improve.
8 During a ﬁ  eld exercise you misdiagnose a condition that affects the health of a fellow cadet. Roll Medic 8+. If you 
succeed, you manage to correct the mistake; if not, the cadet is made worse and you gain him as a Rival.
9 The life of a Med Judge is tough: not only must you complete your medical training, you have to double-up on the 
standard Judge training too and the workload takes its toll. Roll 1d6 to determine how you cope with the strain:
1: Develop a sick and morbid sense of humour.
2: Become emotionless and detached from the world – more like a machine than a human being.
3: Decide that all crime is a sickness that can be cured through medical means. Insist on giving all perps a 
thorough medical examination in the hope ﬁ nding a cure for their illness.
4: Become obsessed with the medical shows of the late 20
th and early 21st Centuries; believe that old medical 
techniques relying on skill, rather than machinery, are the most effective.
5: Become deeply unsympathetic to any but the most seriously injured. It is perfectly possible to function with a 
hand or foot missing – no use in being lily-livered about things...
6: Become an expert on a single type of disease or medical condition. You see potential symptoms for this 
everywhere. Does that Judge have a cold? Could be – or it could be Jigsaw Disease in its early stages...
10 You develop a deep distrust of Futsies, even though you know this is a medical condition that requires patience 
and sympathy. Whenever faced with a Futsie, you ﬂ y into a rage unless you can roll End 10+.
11 You succumb to a destructive vice as a result of coping the pressure of the Academy. Roll 1d6 to determine 
what it is:
1: Addiction to Umpty Candy, 2: Addiction to Comic Books, 3: Gambling for the highest possible stakes, 4: 
Reckless, self-destructive behaviour, 5: Smoking, 6: Over-eating – you gain considerable weight.
You must regularly and secretly, fulﬁ l your urges or suffer a negative DM to skills. Your Referee will decide the 
intensity of the penalty and for how long.
12 You are injured. Roll on the Injury table on page 37 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.

===PAGE 28===
 Academy Of Law
27
Events
Every character gains a roll on the Events table appropriate to their specialisation.
Street Judge Term Three and Four Events
d66 Event
11 Disaster! Roll on the Mishap table but remain in the Academy.
12 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 Str.
13 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
14 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one level.
15 You study the geography of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One Geography.
16 You study the history of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One History.
21 You suspect a fellow cadet of cheating in his tests and studies. Throw Int 8+ to be con ﬁ rmed of your 
suspicions. If you confront him and have a choice: Turn a blind eye and gain an Ally, or report him and 
gain an Enemy. If you do the latter, you gain a level of Law.
22 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 Dex.
23 Interrogation tuition involves the live interrogation of a real-life perp. Roll Inf 8+ with DMs for Persuasion. 
If you succeed, you extract a full confession from the perp and gain Interrogation 1. If you fail, the perp 
cracks under the scrutiny of a fully trained Judge and you know better for next time.
24 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one level.
25 You make an unexpected connection outside the Academy. Gain a Contact.
26 On a rare parental visit, your father’s manner suggests he might be involved in criminal activity of some 
kind. Throw Investigate 8+ to be conﬁ rmed of your suspicions. If you succeed you have a choice: Turn a 
blind eye – he is your father and will have had a good reason for his actions, OR report him and see him 
arrested – no one is above the law. If you do the latter, you gain +1 Inf but your father also becomes an 
Enemy.
31 Gain an Ally from one of the other specialisations; roll 1d6: 1-2: Psi Cadet, 3-4: Tek Judge Cadet, 5-6: 
Med Judge Cadet.
32 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 End.
33 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
34 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one level.
35 You study the geography of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One Geography.
36 You study the history of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One History.
41 A simulated investigation takes on a dangerous turn. Roll Investigate 10+, Street Perception 10+ or 
Streetwise 10+. If you fail, roll on the Mishap table. If you succeed, gain one of these skills: Deception, 
Persuade or Tactics.
42 You are given specialist training in vehicles. Gain Drive (any) 1, Flyer (any) 1, Pilot (any) 1 or Gunner 
(any) 1.
43 You manipulate and charm your way through the Academy. Gain Carouse, Diplomat, Persuade or 
Steward, as well as a Rival and an Ally.
44 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one level.
45 You spend months studying the criminal underworld. Gain Streetwise 1, Stealth 1, Melee (any) 1 or Gun 
Combat (any) 1.
46 You are given an unsolved case to study. Roll Investigate 10+. If you fail, the solution to the case eludes 
you, just as it eluded the Judge who investigated. If you succeed, you come across some evidence that 
was missed and propose a successful solution to the case. Gain a level in: Deception, Investigate or 
Social Sciences (psychology).

===PAGE 29===
 Academy Of Law
28
51 Someone close to you outside the Academy – a family member or close childhood friend – dies. Roll 1d6 
for the circumstances:
1: Natural causes, 2: A long illness, 3: A tragic accident, 4: A sudden illness, 5: Accidentally shot by a 
Judge, 6: Murdered
If you rolled 1-4 you are given a few hours of compassionate leave to attend the funeral and the Academy 
sends a nice bouquet of synthi-ﬂ owers. You continue your career as normal.
If you rolled 5, throw Int+End 10+ to understand that this was a tragic accident and the Judge will be 
feeling remorseful over the accidental death. If you fail the roll, you are suspicious of the circumstances 
and vow to investigate the death as soon as you have graduated. The Judge may be innocent; but you 
want to be sure.
If you rolled 6, roll a further 1d6. A result of 1-4 and the creep was arrested and sentenced to life in an 
iso-cube. On a 5-6, he managed to escape and is still at large. Roll Int+Law 10+. If you succeed you know 
that you must remain detached from the case: Judges should not seek personal revenge. If you fail, you 
decide that, the minute you graduate, you will be out on the streets hunting for this perp – and, when you 
ﬁ nd him, you’ll make him regret ever being born...
52 One of your tutors takes a special interest in your career. Gain one from: Advocate, Comms or Tactics.
53 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
54 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one level.
55 You study the geography of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One Geography.
56 You study the history of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One History.
61 You take part in the Inter-Faculty Marksman competitions. Roll Gun Combat (Lawgiver) 8+ and note the 
Effect.
6+: A dazzling display. Select any one Special Technique.
4-5: You perform admirably. Gain an extra roll on the Skill table this Term.
2-3: Your performance is good but you know you can do better.
0-1: Adequate performance but you know you should have done much better. Gain a Rival.
If you fail, your team loses. Lose 1 Inf.
62 Roll Law 10+. If you succeed, you ﬁ nd a ﬂ aw or loophole in the law that has allowed dozens of perps 
to escape on technicalities or light sentencing. You may roll Inf 10+ to point this out to your superiors; 
if successful, it leads to changes in the law to close the loopholes and you will gain an additional Term 
Four skill roll as a reward. If you fail, the tutors study your recommendations but conclude that they would 
require additional, extensive revisions that would be detrimental for more serious offences.
63 You focus on developing one of your physical characteristics at the expense of another. Increase one of 
Str, Dex or End by +1 but reduce one of the other physical characteristics by 1 to compensate. Gain a level 
of Athletics in a specialisation reﬂ ecting the improved characteristic.
64 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
65 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one level.
66 You emerge as top of your class in this Term’s exams. You gain a special commendation from the Head 
of the Academy and you gain an additional roll on any of this Term’s skill tables.
d66 Event

===PAGE 30===
 Academy Of Law
29
Psi Judge Term Three and Four Events
d66 Event
11 Disaster! Roll on the Mishap table but remain in the Academy.
12 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 End.
13 Undertake rigorous Psi training. Gain +1 Psi.
14 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
15 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one 
level.
16 You study the geography of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One Geography.
21 You study the history of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One History.
22 Undertake rigorous memory training. Gain +1 Int.
23 Interrogation tuition involves the live interrogation of a real-life perp. Roll Psi 8+ with DMs for Persuasion. 
If you succeed, you extract a full confession from the perp and gain Interrogation 1. If you fail, the perp 
cracks under the scrutiny of a fully trained Judge and you know better for next time.
24 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one 
level.
25 You make an unexpected connection outside the Academy. Gain a Contact.
26 Gain an Ally from one of the other specialisations; roll 1d6:
1-2: Street Judge Cadet, 3-4: Tek Judge Cadet, 5-6: Med Judge Cadet.
31 Undertake rigorous Psi training. Gain +1 Psi.
32 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
33 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one 
level.
34 You study the geography of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One Geography.
35 You study the history of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One History.
36 You study the history and science of psionics. Gain Life Sciences (psioncology).
41 Your studies delve deep into the history of the Dark Judges, the Necropolis and the saga of the Judge 
Child. As a result one of your powers in any Talent gains a +1 DM when you use it.
42 Your training hardens you to the effects of Psionic Trauma. If you have accrued any levels of Psionic 
Trauma, reduce it by 1. If you have not accrued any Psionic Trauma, you may ignore the ﬁ rst level you 
receive.
43 You volunteer for an advanced psion training programme in Advanced Talents (see page 184). Roll Psi 
8+. If you succeed, you may test for one Advanced Talent your Referee chooses, with the exception of 
Ship Integration, gaining a +1 DM to the Learning of that Talent.
44 Gain any skill or Special Technique from the tables in this career at level 1. However, one of your 
Psionic Powers in any one Talent becomes impotent and you cannot use it.
45 You are selected for specialist Psionics Training. Throw Psi 9+. If you succeed, choose either to: 
increase a Talent by 1 level; OR gain a Power from any other Talent you are not capable of using. 
You may use this Power by rolling against your Psi but always at –3 until you are competent with that 
Power’s Talent.

===PAGE 31===
 Academy Of Law
30
46 You inadvertently scan a fellow cadet, a tutor or a family member who is allowed a rare visit and 
discover a deep secret. Roll 1d6 to discover what it is:
1: He or she has lied to you over something in the past.
2: He or she is a perp – or will be.
3: He or she is involved in some form of scandal.
4: He or she has been involved in some form of corruption.
5: He or she is really an Enemy (gain an Enemy).
6: He or she knows something of great value or power but you cannot identify what it is.
51 You are given specialist training in technology. Gain a level of Computer, Flyer (any), Drive (Lawmaster) 
or Mechanic.
52 You are enlisted in a special advancement programme. Roll Int 8+. If you succeed, you gain +1 to your 
Psionic Strength. If you fail, roll once on the Special Techniques table.
53 Judges from Psi Division bring a case they are working on for the trainee Psi Judges to study and offer 
their thoughts and feelings. Roll Psi 10+. If you succeed, you offer considerable insight into the case 
and gain an additional roll on the Term Four skill tables next Term. You also gain a Contact in Psi 
Division. If you fail, insights into the case elude you but you still gain a Psi Division Contact.
54 Your training involves mind duels with fellow Psi cadets. Roll Psi 10+. If you succeed you win the duel. 
Gain either +1 Int, +1 Psi or +1 Inf.
55 You are plagued by dreams, visions and premonitions. Throw Psi 10+ (with DMs for Clairvoyance) and 
note the Effect of the roll:
–2: You are conﬁ dent that the premonitions are the result of stress and dismiss them
–1-0: The premonitions trouble you but you can ﬁ nd nothing that will make them a reality
+1: You identify factors at work that will lead to the premonitions coming to pass. Gain +1 Int as you 
eliminate them
+2 or higher: As above but also gain +1 Psi Strength.
56 Selected for specialised training. Gain one level of Deception, Comms, Computer or Stealth.
61 Psionic training leads to you being able to use one of your psionic powers with greater ef ﬁ ciency. The 
Psi cost for the power chosen is always half (with a minimum of 1 point) the usual cost.
62 You uncover the secret to enhancing your psionic abilities. Gain +1 to an existing power, if you can 
roll Psi 10+.
63 A psionically adept alien species is brought to the Academy for study. Roll 1d6 and half the result 
(rounding up); this is the number of your powers that gains a +1 DM, when you use them, as a result 
of studying with your alien counterparts. The powers can be from any Talents in which you are trained 
in.
64 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
65 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one 
level.
66 You emerge as top of your class in this Term’s exams. You gain a special commendation from the 
Head of the Academy and you gain an additional roll on any of this Term’s skill tables.
d66 Event

===PAGE 32===
 Academy Of Law
31
Tek Judge Term Three and Four Events
d66 Event
11 Disaster! Roll on the Mishap table but remain in the Academy.
12 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 Str.
13 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
14 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one 
level.
15 Roll Engineer or Mechanic 10+. If you succeed, a training exercise is highly rewarding and you gain +1 
Int. If you fail, the project goes wrong and you must roll on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, 
page 37).
16 You gain special training. Gain a level from one of the following skills: Astrogation, Comms, Explosives, 
Gunner, Medic, Navigation or Recon.
21 Your training leads to a year spent studying the skills of a specialised Tek Judge branch: roll 1d6 
determine which and gain a level in the skill associated with it:
1: Explosives/Demotions Unit – Explosives, 2: Justice Space Corp – Pilot (Spacecraft) or Astrogation, 
3: Justice Technology Research – Engineer, 4: MAC Division – Computers, 5: Science Division – 
Science (any Physical or Space science), 6: Surveillance Squad – Remote Ops or Sensors.
22 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 Dex.
23 You undertake a special course in antique technology from the 20
th Century. Gain +1 DM to any 
applicable skill when dealing with technology from this era.
24 One of your tests as part of training is to attempt to gain access to a secure part of the Academy of 
Law’s computer systems, demonstrating your ability to hack into the most well protected criminal 
databases. Roll Computers 10+. If you succeed, roll 1d6 to see what you uncover:
1: You locate the information you were told to ﬁ nd and score full marks in the test.
2: You somehow hack into the records of the cadets in your year. You may ignore the records if you 
wish. If you choose to read them, you gain valuable information on the training history, achievements 
and personal views of the tutors, on one of your colleagues.
3: You hack into records that hint at irregularities in the training process. If you make this knowledge 
known, you will be forced to leave the Academy. It is therefore a secret that you must harbour – it may 
become important some day.
4: You hack into your own records and are disturbed by what you ﬁ nd there. Your Survival roll for next 
Term will be at a –1DM.
5: You hack into the records of Judge Dredd. The advantage this gives you for next Term is a +1 DM 
to you Survival roll.
6: You hack into the ﬁ nancial systems of the Academy. You could, if you wished, make yourself or 
your family very, very wealthy – and the Academy would not miss the money. If you choose to do 
this, roll Deception 10+ to cover your tracks. If you fail, you are caught and immediately sentenced 
to 15 years in the Iso-Cubes.
25 The Sim Halls test your ability to build defences and improvise under live ﬁ re conditions. Gain Combat 
Engineering.
26 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
31 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by one 
level.
32 You study the science of robotics. Gain Space Sciences (robotics).

===PAGE 33===
 Academy Of Law
32
33 A simulated investigation takes on a dangerous turn. Roll Investigate 10+, Street Perception 10+ or 
Streetwise 10+. If you fail, roll on the Mishap table. If you succeed, gain one of these skills: Deception, 
Jack of All Trades, Persuade or Tactics.
34 You are given specialist training in vehicles. Gain Drive (any) 1, Flyer (any) 1, Pilot (any) 1 or Gunner 
(any) 1.
35 You spend time on ﬁ eld experience with Tek Division. Gain a Contact.
36 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
41 Gain an Ally from one of the other specialisations; roll 1d6:
1-2: Street Judge Cadet, 3-4: Psi Judge Cadet, 5-6: Med Judge Cadet.
42 Undertake rigorous mental training. Gain +1 Int.
43 A technical project you are working on has wider beneﬁ ts for the Justice department. Gain an additional 
roll on the Term Four skills table next Term.
44 The Sim Halls test your ability to build and improvise under live ﬁ re conditions. Gain Combat 
Engineering.
45 You show a natural aptitude for science during your tutelage. Gain a level in Physical Sciences 
(physics).
46 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
51 You study the geography of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One Geography.
52 You study the history of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One History.
53 You show a natural aptitude for science during your tutelage. Gain a level in Physical Sciences 
(chemistry).
54 Tek Judge training is rigorous but comprehensive. Gain a level in Jack of All Trades.
55 You are given a piece of alien technology to study as part of your Term Three examinations. Throw 
Int+Engineer 10+ to determine what it is. If you already have the Oh So That’s What It Does Special 
Technique you do not need to roll. If you are successful roll 1d6 to discover what it is:
1: Artwork, 2: Comms Equipment, 3: Computer, 4: Sensor, 5: Toy or Game, 6: Weapon
Whatever it is, your work in determining its function grants you Edu +1.
56 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
61 A technical breakthrough is made by your tutor group. A rival Tek tutor group claims you stole their 
ideas and progress. Roll Computers+Inf 10+ to convince the Principal that your success was all your 
own. If you fail, it seems your rivals were right and someone cheated. You forfeit your skill roll for Term 
Four (although any skill rolls you gain for Events are still valid). If you succeed, gain Investigate. You 
also gain a Rival.
62 The Sim Halls test your ability to build defences and improvise under live ﬁ re conditions. Gain Combat 
Engineering. However, you must also roll Dex 10+. If you fail, you are injured; roll on the Injury table 
(Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37)
63 You gain an insight into how criminals use the highly advanced computers of the 22
nd Century to 
commit technical crimes. Gain Social Sciences (psychology).
64 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 End.
65 You show a natural aptitude for science during your tutelage. Gain a level in Physical Sciences 
(electronics).
66 You emerge as top of your class in this Term’s exams. You gain a special commendation from the 
Head of the Academy and you gain an additional roll on any of this Term’s skill tables.
d66 Event

===PAGE 34===
 Academy Of Law
33
Med Judge Term Three and Four Events
d66 Event
11 Disaster! Roll on the Mishap table but remain in the Academy.
12 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 Str.
13 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
14 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by 
one level.
15 You study the geography of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One Geography.
16 You study the history of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One History.
21 Roll Medic 10+. If you succeed, you ﬁ nd a medical condition that has allowed dozens of 
perps to escape on technicalities or light sentencing. You may roll Inf 10+ to point this out 
to your superiors; if successful, it leads to changes in the law to close the loopholes and 
you will gain an additional Term Four skill roll as a reward. If you fail, the tutors study your 
recommendations but conclude that they would require additional, extensive revisions that 
would introduce other detriments to more serious offences.
22 Undertake rigorous educational training. Gain +1 Int or a level in either Medic or any Science.
23 Interrogation tuition involves the live interrogation of a real-life perp using drugs and truth 
serums. Roll Medic 8+ with DMs for Persuasion. If you succeed, you extract a full confession 
from the perp and gain Interrogation 1. If you fail, the perp cracks under the scrutiny of a fully 
trained Judge and you know better for next time.
24 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by 
one level.
25 You make an unexpected civilian connection outside the Academy. Gain a Contact.
26 An undercover exercise in the Sim Halls sees you get far too deep into the role you are 
playing. Roll End 10+. If you succeed you emerge from the exercise a little confused but 
having developed a Special Technique: roll on the Special Techniques table.
If you fail, you suffer a crisis of conﬁ dence. Whenever you are in an emergency medical 
situation again, you should roll End 8+ to retain faith in your medical abilities. If you fail, you 
ﬁ nd yourself panicking and suffering a –1 DM to the skill you are attempting to use.
31 Gain an Ally from one of the other specialisations; roll 1d6:
1-2: Street Judge Cadet, 3-4: Tek Judge Cadet, 5-6: Psi Cadet.
32 Undertake rigorous physical training. Gain +1 End.
33 As a result of excellence in your medical studies you are selected for additional training. Roll 
on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
34 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by 
one level.
35 You study the geography of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One Geography.
36 You study the history of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One History.
41 A routine medical experiment takes on a dangerous turn. Roll Medic 10+, Science (any) 10+ 
or Int 10+. If you fail, roll on the Mishap table. If you succeed, gain a level in Science (any 
science you do not already have).
42 You are given specialist training in vehicles. Gain Drive (any) 1, Flyer (any) 1 or Pilot (any) 1.
43 You manipulate and charm your way through the Academy. Gain Diplomat, Persuade or 
Steward, as well as a Rival and an Ally.

===PAGE 35===
 Academy Of Law
34
44 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by 
one level.
45 You spend months studying the psychology of the criminal underworld. Gain Streetwise 1, 
Stealth 1, Melee (any) 1 or Gun Combat (any) 1.
46 You are given an unsolved case to study. Roll Investigate 10+. If you fail, the solution to the 
case eludes you, just as it eluded the Judge who investigated.
If you succeed, you come across some evidence that was missed and propose a successful 
solution to the case. Gain one from: Deception, Investigate or Social Sciences (psychology).
51 You focus on developing one of your physical characteristics at the expense of another. 
Increase one of Str, Dex or End by +1 but reduce one of the other physical characteristics 
by 1 to compensate. Gain a level of Athletics in a specialisation reﬂ ecting the improved 
characteristic.
52 One of your tutors takes a special interest in your career. Gain one from: Advocate, Comms or 
Tactics.
53 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
54 You accompany a real-life Justice Department Med team on a routine Mega-City One shift. 
Gain a Contact from amongst that Med Team and gain +1 Int.
55 You study the criminal mind. Gain a level in Social Science (psychology).
56 You study the history of the city. Gain a level in Mega-City One History.
61 During a practical medical experiment you ﬁ nd yourself in command of your tutor group. Roll 
Medic 10+. If successful, gain a level of Leadership. If you fail, your command is good but not 
outstanding.
62 An accident in the sim halls tests your medical capabilities to the limit. Roll Medic 8+. If you 
succeed, you gain valuable experience and conﬁ dence in providing medical attention under 
ﬁ re: gain the Life Saver special technique.
63 You make a study of those who suffer from Future Shock and other psychological disorders 
associated with the pace of life of 22
nd Century mega cities. When dealing with such people 
you may add your Int or Inf DM to any DMs for the skill you are using.
64 You are selected for additional training. Roll on either the Skills or Special Techniques table.
65 You demonstrate particular aptitude in one of the skills gained in Basic Training. Increase it by 
one level.
66 You emerge as top of your class in this Term’s exams. You gain a special commendation from 
the Head of the Academy and you gain an additional roll on any of this Term’s skill tables.
d66 Event

===PAGE 36===
 Academy Of Law
35
 Hotdog Run
All Judges, irrespective of their specialisation, undertake the hazardous Hotdog Run into the Cursed Earth. Here, the cadets are 
expected to become acquainted with life beyond the conﬁ nes of Mega-City One, demonstrate their skills in handling the variety 
of hazards to be found in the devastated wildlands and emerge as more rounded individuals.
Characters do not roll for Survival separately for their Hotdog run. Instead, note the Survival roll made earlier in this Term.  If 
it was passed, then the character gains a +2 DM to the Hot Dog Run Outcome roll (see below). If Survival was failed and the 
cadet has remained in the Academy, he gains a –2 DM to the Outcome roll.
Hotdog Run Outcome Roll
Roll 2d6 and apply the positive or negative DM for Survival, then consult the Outcome table for the appropriate result.
2d6 Hotdog Run Outcome
0 Severely Injured. Roll twice on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the lowest result
1 Injured. Roll on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37).
2 Recurring Radiation Sickness. The cadet suffers from radiation sickness following a failure of safety procedures 
or abnormally high levels of rads in the area where the run takes place. The character loses 1 point from either 
Str, End or Int. In addition, the sickness recurs. Your Referee will decide when but when it does strike you will 
have to roll End 8+ to shake off its effect. Roll 1d6 to see what effect that will be:
1: Bed-ridden for 1d6 days.
2: Become prone to headaches for 2d6 hours, suffering –1 to all skills.
3: Subject to nausea causing vomiting and the shakes that last for 1d6 minutes; you can do nothing during such 
attacks.
4: Double vision and dizziness lasting 1d6 hours. –2 to all skills.
5: Flu-like symptoms; coughing, sneezing and hot ﬂ ushes. –1 to all skills for 1d6 days.
6: Bed-ridden for 3d6 days.
3 Temporary Radiation Sickness. The cadet suffers from radiation sickness following a failure of safety procedures 
or abnormally high levels of rads in the area where the run takes place. The character loses 1 point from either 
Str, End or Int.
4 Mutie or Monster attack. Your group is attacked by muties or Cursed Earth monsters insistent on your blood. Roll 
one of the following: Gun Combat 8+, Drive (Lawmaster) 8+, Mechanic 8+, Engineering 8+, Medic 8+, Psionic 
Strength 8+ or Survival 8+. If you succeed, you beat-off the attack successfully. If you fail, roll on the Injury table 
(Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37).
5 Mutant Justice. You are taken into a shanty town or village populated by mutants where you must assess existing 
crime and return your verdict on how justice should best be dispensed. Roll Law 8+. If successful, you gain +1 
Inf.
6 Your group is faced with extreme conditions that take every ounce of skill and technique to deal with. Roll 9+ on 
2d6, using your highest skill as a DM. If you succeed, you may increase your lowest skill by 1 level or gain +1 to 
any of your characteristics.
7 Your dealings with the denizens of the Cursed Earth is ﬁ rm but fair. You gain a Contact from amongst the Cursed 
Earth’s inhabitants.
8 The community of Cursed Earth denizens you come across treats the Judges with respect and humility and learn 
how to communicate with them effectively. You gain a +1 DM to Inﬂ uence whenever you are dealing with Cursed 
Earth mutants.
9 Roll Inf+Law 8+. If successful you assist in bringing a notorious perp hiding in the Cursed Earth to justice; gain an 
additional roll on any of the tables for this Term. However, you also gain that perp as an Enemy.
10 You ﬁ nd the Cursed Earth strangely compelling, for all its horror and weirdness. You know that when you retire, 
you will deﬁ nitely take the Long Walk. Until then, gain Survival 1.
11 The Cursed Earth makes you physically more resilient. Gain either Survival 1 or +1 End.
12 The Cursed Earth helps you make better decisions, having seen its depredations. Gain either Law 1 or +1 Int.
13 Through your experience in the Cursed Earth, you have a better understanding of the foibles of Mega-City One’s 
citizens. Gain +1 Inf or a level of Street Perception.
14 You handle the rigours of the Cursed Earth with distinction. Gain one level in any skill of your choosing and a roll 
on the Special Techniques table for this Term.

===PAGE 37===
 Academy Of Law
 Academy Of Law
36
The last full Term before graduation sees the cadet Judges going through 
more of the intense specialisation experienced in Term Three. Mishaps 
and Events use the Term Three tables but Survival, Skills and Special 
Techniques use the tables below.
Street Judges Term Four Skills and Training
Roll Personal Development Skill Special Techniques
1 +1 Str Drive (Lawmaster) or Drive (wheeled) Formidable Presence
2 +1 Dex Medic or Computers Combat Acuity
3 +1 End Gun Combat (Lawgiver) or Melee 
(bludgeon)
Recovery
4 +1 Int Law or Tactics Rapid Aim
5 +1 Inf Admin or Advocate Track Perp
6 Jack of All Trades Interrogation or Investigate Character’s Choice from Special 
Techniques (see page 50)
Psi Judges Term Four Skills and Training
Roll Personal Development Skill Special Techniques
1 +1 Str Drive (Lawmaster) or Drive 
(wheeled)
Enhanced Power
2 +1 Dex Gun Combat (any) Dead Zone
3 +1 Psi Medic Enhanced Talent
4 +1 Int Additional Psionic Talent Inner Strength
5 +1 to your Basic Training Psi Talent Investigate or Interrogation Sixth Sense
6 +1 to your Basic Training Psi Talent Life Sciences (psioncology) Character’s Choice from Special 
Techniques (see page 50)
Basic Training
Characters gain basic training skills based on 
their stream, as follows:
Street Judges: Gain a level of Law, Gain a 
level of Street Perception, Gain a level of Survival.
Psi Division : Gain one level in any one 
Talent you are trained in, plus a new Basic or an 
Advanced Talent (see page 184).
Tek Judges: Combat Engineering 1, Jack of All 
Trades 1, Science (any Physical or Space Science) 1.
Med Judges: Life Sciences (any) 1, Gain a 
level of Medic, Streetwise 1.
Skills
Personal Development, Special Techniques and 
Skills are determined by the tables for your career 
stream. Note that for Term Four, characters gain 
one roll on each table as part of Term Four training.
 Term Four

===PAGE 38===
 Academy Of Law
37
Tek Judges Term Four Skills and Training
Roll Personal Development Skill Special Techniques
1 +1 Int Astrogation or Engineer (any) Rapid Assessment
2 +1 Dex Comms or Computers Steady Hand
3 +1 Dex Gun Combat (any) Data Access
4 +1 Int Mechanic or Medic Jerry-Rig
5 +1 Inf Navigation or Pilot (any) Oh, So That’s What it Does...
6 Jack of All Trades Flyer (any) Character’s Choice from Special 
Techniques (see page 50)
Med Judge Term Four Skills and Training
Roll Personal Development Skill Special Techniques
1 +1 Str Gun Combat (any) Life Saver
2 +1 Dex Medic Rapid Diagnosis
3 +1 End Life Sciences (any) Perp Sense
4 +1 Int Physical Sciences (any) Recovery
5 +1 Inf Investigate Sixth Sense
6 Jack of All Trades Jack of All Trades Character’s Choice from Special 
Techniques (see page 50)
Survival
Roll 7+ on 2d6. You may add your highest characteristic DM 
to this roll, plus any DMs for your specialisation, as follows:
Street Judges: Gun Combat (any) or Melee (any)
Psi Judges: Psionic Strength
Tek Judges: Mechanics or Engineer
Med Judges: Medic or Computers
 Full Eagle 
Day
After ﬁ fteen years of the toughest, most rigorous training on earth, 
this is what it all comes down to; the culmination of the hard work 
and effort, injuries, set-backs and triumphs: Full Eagle Day.
Wearing the white helmet and half-eagle badge of a 
rookie Judge, the cadet goes onto the streets to spend a 
working day with a seasoned Judge who then decides if 
the cadet is suitable for graduation. The assessing Judge 
has considerable leeway in passing or failing cadets but his 
decision is ﬁ nal; there is no appeal and no second chance. If 
the assessing Judge fails the rookie then that is it – he must 
ﬁ nd something else to do with his life.
To pass Full Eagle Day, the cadet goes through the following steps:
Make a successful Survival roll for Full Eagle Day. This is 12+ 
but the cadet applies DMs according to his specialisation, as 
below:
• Street Judge: Str or Dex characteristic DM, Gun 
Combat (Lawgiver), Law, plus a DM equal to his highest 
skill, not already used in this list.
• Psi Judge: Psionic Strength characteristic DM, any 
two Psionic Talents; plus a DM equal to his highest skill, 
not already used in this list.
• Tek Judge: Int characteristic DM, Computers, 
Engineering OR Mechanic; plus a DM equal to his 
highest skill, not already used in this list.
• Med Judge: Int characteristic DM, Medic, Science 
(any) OR Persuasion OR Stealth; plus a DM equal to 
his highest skill, not already used in this list.
The Survival roll is further modi ﬁ ed by the attitude of the 
Assessing Judge...
Assessing Judge’s Attitude
Judges are not all as stony-faced and meticulous as Dredd. 
Some, recalling how hard life as a rookie is and knowing 
how valuable it is to have Judges on the street, are more 
lenient than others. Roll on the Attitude Table to determine 
the Judge’s attitude towards his Full Eagle Day cadet, and 
the DM this applies to the Survival roll.

===PAGE 39===
 Academy Of Law
38
Attitude Table
2d6 Assessing 
Judge’s Attitude
Survival 
Roll DM
2-5 Lenient +2
6-10 Moderate 0
11-12 Strict –2
If the Survival Roll is 
Passed…
Then the cadet passes his Full Eagle Day assessment and 
graduates as a full Judge, being awarded his Full Eagle 
and black helmet. He passes out in the grand but solemn, 
Graduation Parade and is almost immediately assigned to a 
Sector House to begin his career.
You may begin play with your Judge as he is or, if the 
Referee wishes it, your Judge can be enhanced under the 
Seasoned Judges process, explained below.
If the Survival Roll is 
Failed…
Then there is a chance that your Judge will not be passed by 
the assessing Judge and his career is over. As with any failure 
to make a Survival roll, roll on the Full Eagle Mishaps table.
2d6 Mishap
2 Disaster! Everything that could go wrong has gone wrong. The assessing Judge concludes that 15 years of training has 
still not made you ready and there is little prospect of being so. You are failed and your career as a Judge ends here.
3 You are severely wounded. Roll twice on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and apply the lowest result. 
If you can succeed in making an Inf 8+ roll, the assessing Judge is still pleased with your performance and he passes 
you. Congratulations. If you fail the roll, the assessing Judge concludes that 15 years of training has still not made you 
ready and there is little prospect of you ever being so. You are failed and your career as a Judge ends here.
4 You are wounded. Roll on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37). If you can succeed in making an Inf 7+ 
roll, the assessing Judge is still pleased with your performance and he passes you. Congratulations.
If you fail the roll, the assessing Judge concludes that 15 years of training has still not made you ready and there is little 
prospect of you ever being so. You are failed and your career as a Judge ends here.
5 Although things go smoothly, applying the law to a perp you apprehend seems to be more complicated than you had 
thought. Roll Law 8+. If you succeed, the assessing Judge is still pleased with your performance and he passes you. 
Congratulations. If you fail the roll, the assessing Judge concludes that 15 years of training has still not made you ready 
and there is little prospect of you ever being so. You are failed and your career as a Judge ends here.
6 You ﬁ nd yourself in a combat situation. Roll Gun Combat (Lawgiver) 8+. If you succeed, the assessing Judge is still 
pleased with your performance and he passes you. Congratulations. If you fail the roll, The assessing Judge concludes 
that 15 years of training have still not made you ready and there is little prospect of being so. You are Failed and your 
career as a Judge ends here.
7 Passing Full Eagle Day requires you to chase-down a ﬂ eeing Perp. Roll either Athletics (any) 8+ or Street Perception 
8+. If you succeed, the assessing Judge is still pleased with your performance and he passes you. Congratulations. If 
you fail the roll, the assessing Judge concludes that 15 years of training has still not made you ready and there is little 
prospect of you ever being so. You are failed and your career as a Judge ends here.
8 Your assessment takes you out onto the skedways of Mega-City One and you must apprehend a perp committing a 
trafﬁ c offence from the saddle of your Lawmaster. Throw Drive (Lawmaster) 8+. If you succeed, the assessing Judge 
is still pleased with your performance and he passes you. Congratulations. If you fail the roll, the assessing Judge 
concludes that 15 years of training has still not made you ready and there is little prospect of you ever being so. You are 
failed and your career as a Judge ends here.
9 Your survival instincts are put to the test on Full Eagle Day. Roll Medic 8+ or Survival 8+. If you succeed, the assessing 
Judge is still pleased with your performance and he passes you. Congratulations. If you fail the roll, the assessing 
Judge concludes that 15 years of training has still not made you ready and there is little prospect of you ever being so. 
You are failed and your career as a Judge ends here.
10 Your powers of persuasion are needed if you are to pass Full Eagle Day. Throw Persuade 8+. If you succeed, the 
assessing Judge is still pleased with your performance and he passes you. Congratulations. If you fail the roll, the 
assessing Judge concludes that 15 years of training has still not made you ready and there is little prospect of you ever 
being so. You are failed and your career as a Judge ends here.
11 Choose one of your skills (whether basic training or a specialisation) and roll 8+. If you succeed, the assessing Judge 
is still pleased with your performance and he passes you. Congratulations. If you fail the roll, the assessing Judge 
concludes that 15 years of training has still not made you ready and there is little prospect of you ever being so. You are 
failed and your career as a Judge ends here.
12 Despite seeming to have failed in every task set before you, the assessing Judge was placing individual tests of your 
mettle. To your surprise and relief you are passed. Congratulations.

===PAGE 40===
 Academy Of Law
 Academy Of Law
 Seasoned   
Judges
39
If your Judge Dredd campaign is to use experienced Judges, 
then the Seasoned Judges procedure can be applied to produce 
a more savvy, rounded Judge character. The procedure can be 
run up to two times, with each application of it 
representing four years on the streets.
Survival
The different specialisations have different 
Survival rolls, as below.
Street Judge: End 7+
Psi Judge: Psi 7+
Tek Judge: Int 7+
Med Judge: Int 7+
Mishaps
If the Survival throw is failed, roll on the Mishaps table. 
All specialisations use the same Mishap table.
2d6 Mishap
2 Severely injured. Roll twice on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the lowest result.
3 Severe injury takes you out of action for several months. Reduce the Skill points available for developing skills from 
5 to 3.
4 Injury takes you out of action for several weeks. Reduce the Skill points available for developing skills from 5 to 4
5 You are faced with an especially dif ﬁ cult case to crack. Throw the skill indicated by your specialisation:
Street Judge: Law 10+
Psi Judge: Psionic Strength 10+
Tek Judge: Engineering 10+
Med Judge: Medic 10+
If you succeed, the case is cracked without any detriment. If you fail, you gain an Enemy. You must also roll End 8+ 
or suffer an injury and roll on the Injury table (Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37).
6 You are subject to an SJS investigation. Roll In ﬂ uence 8+ to convince the SJS of your innocence. If you succeed, 
you are fully exonerated. If you fail, SJS remain suspicious of you for various reasons. Gain one SJS Judge as an 
Enemy.
7 An innocent civilian is killed as a result of your zealous pursuit of a perp. You gain 1d6 Enemies in the form of the 
dead citizen’s family and friends. You must throw Inf+Law 10+ to demonstrate to your superiors that your actions 
were unavoidable. If you succeed, it is acknowledged that you were only doing your job and this was a tragic 
accident. If you fail, you are investigated by the SJS. Roll Int 8+ or Advocate 8+ to prove your innocence to them. If 
you fail, you are found negligent and given a bum posting. Lose 1 Inﬂ uence as a result of the experience.
8 Your handling of a case or incident is criticised by your fellow Judges. You must explain your actions to the Sector 
Chief. Roll either Advocate or Persuasion 8+ (with a DM for your In ﬂ uence); if you succeed, the Sector Chief is 
satisﬁ ed with your actions; however you gain 1 Judge as a Rival. If you fail the roll, you are reprimanded publicly: 
gain 1 Judge as a Rival and lose 1 point of Inf.
9 An arrest and sentence you carried out goes to appeal. Roll Law 10+ to prove your reasoning for the sentence. If 
successful, the appeal fails and your reputation is undiminished. If you fail, you are rebuked by the Sector Chief for 
failing to understand and apply the law correctly. You lose 1 point of Inf as a result.

===PAGE 41===
 Academy Of Law
40
10 Working a tough case with a partner, you lose concentration momentarily. Roll 1d6 to see what happens:
1: Both of you come under ﬁ re from the perps you are chasing. You are wounded (roll on the Injury table, Traveller 
Core Rulebook, page 37) but your partner is killed. Gain 1d6 Rivals in the form of your partners close colleagues 
who blame you for his death.
2: Both of you come under ﬁ re from the perps you are chasing. You are both wounded (roll on the Injury table, 
Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) for yourself and your partner. Your partner now becomes an Enemy, as he feels 
he cannot trust your judgement or ability to concentrate.
3: Both of you come under ﬁ re from the perps and your partner is wounded whilst you are unscathed. Your partner 
now becomes a Rival.
4: Neither of you are hurt but your partner is suspicious of your abilities. Roll Inf+Advocate 10+ to convince him that 
this was a temporary aberration. If you fail the roll, he becomes a Rival.
5: The perps escape and your partner blames you. Roll Inf+Law 10+ to justify yourself to your Sector Head. If you 
fail, lose 1 Inf.
6: As for 5 but your negligence is unforgivable. You are forced to take the Long Walk, and your career as a Mega-
City One Judge is over.
11 A fellow Judge who you consider a good friend and partner turns bad. You have a choice:
1. Confront him and arrest him. Roll Inf+Law 10+. If you succeed, he breaks-down and admits his crimes. He is 
arrested and sentenced to 12 years on Titan. If you fail, he tries to kill you. Roll Gun Combat (Lawgiver) 10+. If you 
succeed, you kill him but have enough evidence to prove your case to the SJS. If you fail, roll twice on the Injury 
table (Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37) and take the lowest result. He goes rogue and you gain an Enemy.
OR 2. Attempt to cover up for him. Roll Deception 10+ to help him cover his tracks. If you succeed, you must live 
with the guilt of being complicit in his corruption. If you fail, SJS catches-up with you and you must take the rap for 
his crimes. You serve 20 years on Titan and your career as a Mega-City One Judge is over.
12 Injured. Roll on the Injury table ( Traveller Core Rulebook, page 37).
Skills
For each four year Term spent creating a Seasoned Judge, 
your Judge’s skills increase in the following ways:
• Distribute 5 points amongst skills (or Talents, for Psi 
Judges) you have already accrued. It costs 1 point to 
raise a level 0 skill to level 1; 2 points to raise a level 1 
skill to level 2; 3 points to raise level 2 to level 3. No skill 
can be raised to more than 3.
• If you wish, you may use some of your 5 points to buy a Special 
Technique. It costs 3 points per technique and you cannot 
choose a technique that is speciﬁ c to a specialisation.
• Increasing a characteristic costs 2 points per 1 point of increase
• Choose a new skill from those available in the Traveller 
Core Rulebook or the new skills described in the next 
chapter. You gain this skill at level 0.
 Allies,  Contacts,  Enemies and 
 Informers
Seasoned Judges have usually built up a whole network of 
Allies, Contacts and Informers who can assist them in their 
work. Similarly, a Judge always makes Enemies – a citizen 
reprimanded for something minor; a perp sentenced to a stiff 
sentence, a relative of someone who has fallen-foul of the 
law, and so on.
2d6 Mishap
Some of these relationships may have been formed during 
the time in the Academy of Law but once out on the street, the 
seasoned Judge starts making – and using – these contacts 
in earnest. The way they work is described on page 35 of the 
Traveller Core Rulebook. When creating a seasoned Judge 
you should also determine what relationships you have 
made. For each four year Term as a seasoned Judge you 
should roll three times on the Relationships table:
Roll Relationships
1 Ally
2 Contact
3 Enemy
4 Informer
5 Rival
6 Roll twice
Informers are a new relationship for Judge Dredd. An 
Informer works in the same way as Contact but will always 
want paying for his help. Payment can be in Credits (the 
department of Justice has a budget for paying informers) or 
in other favours. Note that no Judge will ever bend or break 
the law for an Informer but he may be in a position to use his 
inﬂ uence or skills in a beneﬁ cial way that is entirely legal.

===PAGE 42===
 Academy Of Law
41
Take a little time to put names, roles and potted histories to 
your relationships. How did you gain that Informer? How did 
that normal citizen become an Enemy? What did you do to 
gain an Ally in the SJS? You do not need to write reams on 
each relationship but a little detail will help the Referee to 
use them during game play.
 Special Judicial Service, 
 Holocaust Squad and  Wally 
Squad
There are three additional areas of speciality that have not 
been covered as the Judge goes through Academy Training. 
As a seasoned Judge, and with the Referee’s permission, 
they can be applied now.
Special Judicial Service
The feared SJS is the department responsible for policing 
and investigating other Judges. Its reputation was badly 
shaken during the reign of Chief Judge Cal, who used the 
SJS as his personal terror squad, but since then the SJS 
has managed to salvage its reputation under the watchful 
eye of Judge McGruder. The SJS is to be rightly feared by 
any Judge who has been so weak or foolish as to fall from 
the path of true justice.
Any Judge that has broken or transcended the law can be 
subject to an SJS investigation. SJS Judges specialise in 
tracking through a Judge’s career, arrest record, personal, 
off-duty habits and so forth, on the look out for potential 
transgressions. Most emerge scot-free but some, those who 
have been prone to temptation, can be disciplined, punished 
or even sent to Titan.
If a seasoned Judge wants to become a member of the SJS, 
he must:
• Have no Event or Mishap on his record that has involved 
him in any crime.
• Have Inf and End of 9+.
• Roll Inf 10+ to gain acceptance to the SJS.
SJS Judges gain Investigate 1 as a bonus skill. They also 
gain the right to review all aspects of the lives of their fellow 
Judges, whenever suspicion is aroused but also on routine, 
internal Crime Blitzes where a randomly selected Judge has 
every single aspect of his career scrutinised for the smallest 
possible lapse in adherence to the law.
Holocaust Squad
The Holocaust Squad is a highly specialised unit of Judges 
who tackle the most dangerous hazards and disasters facing 
Mega-City One; those that threaten hundreds of thousands 
of lives and the city’s very existence. Every Holocaust Squad 
Judge knows that he may very well die as a result of saving 
others – but that is of no concern to him. He is prepared 
to lay-down his life in sel ﬂ ess sacriﬁ ce for the law and the 
mega city.
For the most part, Holocaust Squad Judges are serving Street 
Judges who have volunteered to act as part of a Holocaust Squad 
unit when the need arises. Every Holocaust Judge pledges to 
put his life secondary to justice and the safety of Mega-City One 
and undergoes mental tests and holocaust simulations to prove 
that he is fearless in the face of self-sacriﬁ ce.
To become an accepted Holocaust Squad volunteer, a 
Judge must have Survival 2 and Endurance 10 or higher. He 
gains an additional skill and, when called upon to serve his 
Holocaust Squad unit, cannot ignore the summons.
Wally Squad
The Justice Department’s undercover branch, Wally Squad 
Judges abandon the familiar uniform of their colleagues 
for civilian clothes and spend their days mingling with the 
citizens of Mega-City One, in ﬁ ltrating the organised crime 
gangs, becoming agitators and troublemakers to serve 
Justice Department’s agenda, and undertaking a variety of 
deep cover activities.
Wally Squad members can spend years impersonating 
someone else and, even though their training at the 
Academy of Law prepares them for the rigours of city-life, 
the temptations that affect normal citizens are strewn before 
Wally Squad operatives to exactly the same degree. It is 
therefore not unknown for Wally Squad Judges, like Lenny 
Zero, to ‘go native’ and fall prey to the temptations that 
corrupt average citizens. 
If a Judge wants to join the Wally Squad, he must have level 
1 in at least one of the following skills: Broker, Carouse, 
Gamble or Stealth. Acceptance into the Wally Squad is 
achieved on a roll of Inf 8+ with a further DM for the highest 
rated of the above skills. Any Judge who serves with the 
Wally Squad automatically gains 1d6 Contacts from amongst 
the criminal fraternity.
Improving By 
Experience
The procedure for creating a seasoned Judge simulates four 
years of work on the streets of Mega-City One and takes into 
account the rapid learning curve all Judges go through when 
out of the Academy of Law and assigned to their duties.

===PAGE 43===
 Academy Of Law
42
Every Judge learns through continued experience, as found 
in game play during the campaign. Every four years of game 
time, Referees can allow player character Judges to improve 
their characters using a similar process as that used for 
Seasoned Judges:
• You gain 4 points that can be used to raise skills. Talents 
or buy Special Techniques.
• It costs 1 point to raise a level 0 skill to level 1; 2 points 
to raise a level 1 skill to level 2; 3 points to raise level 2 
to level 3; and so on.
• Learning a skill you do not have, so that you gain it at 
level 0, costs 1 point.
• Learning a new Special Technique costs 4 points.
• Increasing a characteristic costs 2 points per 1 point of 
increase
• No more than 1 unused point can be carried over to the 
next allocation of points.
Example 
Character – 
Judge Walker
As an example of creating a Judge, we will take Judge 
Walker through his Academy experience, Full Eagle Day 
and then into two Terms of Seasoned Judge experience.
To begin with, Walker’s characteristics are: Str 5 (–1), Dex 8 
(+0), End 8 (+0), Int 5 (–1), Inf 11 (+1). Remember that the 
Academy provides an Education of 10 and Social Standing 
is not important for a Judge (although it can be considered to 
be at 10). Walker is quite weedy but a little over average in 
terms of health and dexterity. He is certainly not the smartest 
tool in the box but his personality is forceful; perhaps he is a 
stickler for the law.
Term One
Walker enters the Academy as a somewhat frightened ﬁ ve 
year-old. The Academy takes him under its wing and for 
basic training he receives Athletics (co-ordination) 1, Melee 
(unarmed combat) 1 and Survival 1. The aim is to toughen 
him up for the hard years ahead. Let’s see how he copes 
with the process.
Walker gains one roll on either the Personal Development, 
Skills or Special Techniques for Term One: he goes for 
Personal Development, hoping to improve himself physically. 
The 1d6 roll is 4: +1 Int. The schooling he gains from the 
robot tutors is making him a bit smarter – no bad thing in a 
Judge. Walker’s characteristics are now Str 5 (–1), Dex 8 
(+0), End 8 (+0), Int 6 (+0), Inf 11 (+1).
For his Survival, Walker has to roll Inf 4+. The roll is 9 – so 
he sails through his ﬁ rst Term without mishap. Next, for his 
Event, Walker rolls 64 (using d66): Walker forms a deep 
friendship with 2 other cadets in his year and they pledge to 
support each other through thick and thin. He now has two 
Allies and the Referee declares that these are cadet Judges 
Cisco and Strom – the two other characters being created 
for this campaign. As the Referee is using the Connections 
rule (page 8 of the Traveller Core Rulebook ), he decides 
that Walker, Cisco and Strom will bene ﬁ t from each other’s 
experiences. The skills each can gain – 2 maximum from 
Connections – will be ﬁ nalised at the end of Term 4. Until 
then, they are ﬁ rm friends.
Term One is complete; Walker has survived. His 
characteristics and skills are as follows:
Str 5 (–1), Dex 8 (+0), End 8 (+0), Int 6 (+0), Inf 11 (+1).
Athletics (co-ordination) 1, Melee (unarmed combat) 1, 
Survival 1
Term Two
The training becomes far more serious but Walker is up to 
the challenge. For basic training he gains Drive (Lawmaster) 
1, Gun Combat (Lawgiver) 1, Law 1, Mega-City One 
Geography 1 and Street Perception 1. These skills re ﬂ ect 
the essentials all Judges need to know for life in the tumult 
of the megacity.
For additional skills, Walker can roll on either the Personal 
Development or Special Techniques table and once on the 
Skills table. He decides to learn a Special Technique and 
throws 5: Combat Acuity. Walker is quick to react in an array of 
combat simulations, his talent astounding his marksmanship 
tutors. For his skill roll, he throws 3 on 1d6. Walker decides 
to take Computers 1; clearly he has an aptitude for using 
MAC’s phenomenal computing resources.
Time for Survival. It is harder this Term and Walker needs 
to throw Inf 5+: he rolls 4, which means he fails and must 
therefore roll on the Mishap table. The Mishap result is 5: 
high jinks with Cisco and Strom land Walker in trouble and 
he is hauled before the Principal to explain why he thought 
it would be amusing to paint several of the tutor robots pink 
whilst they were recharging their batteries. Abusing paint 
and Academy property is a serious offence. Walker has to 
throw Inf 8+ to successfully come up with an explanation. 
His Inﬂ uence is good, giving him a +1 DM. Walker rolls 11; 
he comes up with an excuse that most likely does not dupe 
the Principal but is so convincingly told and delivered with 
such a calm and authoritative voice, that there is no option 
but to reprimand him and ban him from the paint stores for 
a Term.

===PAGE 44===
 Academy Of Law
43
Now for the Term Two Event. Walker rolls 21 on d66: He 
(and Cisco and Strom, the Referee decides), are selected 
to take an exchange visit to Brit-Cit. The young cadets gain 
a Contact from this visit; the Referee says this is the Brit-Cit 
Judge assigned to look after them during their stay – Judge 
Morrison. Walker also gains an additional roll on the Term 
Two Skill table – he rolls 4 and chooses Street Lore. A 
further 1d6 roll shows that Walker has picked up Streetwise 
1 whilst in Brit-Cit.
So, at the end of Term Two, Walker looks like this:
Str 5 (–1), Dex 8 (+0), End 8 (+0), Int 6 (+0), Inf 11 (+1).
Athletics (co-ordination) 1, Computers 1, Drive (Lawmaster) 
1, Gun Combat (Lawgiver) 1, Law 1, Mega-City One 
Geography 1, Melee (unarmed combat) 1, Street Perception 
1, Streetwise 1, Survival 1
Special Techniques: Combat Acuity
Term Three
This is the year when cadets specialise. Cisco has already 
qualiﬁ ed as a psionic but Walker needs to check for Psionic 
Potential too. He rolls 2d6 and scores 10; he is not psionic 
but perhaps shows some potential. Walker’s Int is only 6, 
so he does not qualify as a Tek Judge on those grounds 
although he does have Computers 1. Despite this, he 
decides to continue as a Street Judge – that is where true 
justice is metered out.
As a Street Judge, his basic training is Gun Combat 
(Lawgiver), Drive (Lawmaster) and Law; all building on his 
Term two skills. Also, after extensive training with the Judges’ 
daystick, he gains Melee (bludgeon) 1. Walker concentrates 
on his skills in Term Three and rolls on the Skills table (1d6 
this time) and gets 5 – Investigate. Walker has a nose for 
getting to the bottom of cases.
His Survival roll is End 7+. Walker’s roll is 6 – so another 
Mishap. Rolling on the Street Judge Mishap table (7), 
Walker studies the Robot Wars; he must roll End 8+ to avoid 
developing a deep distrust of robots. He rolls 6. Clearly, the 
experiences of painting the tutor robots pink and how those 
particular robots treated him, has left him bitter towards robots 
for all kinds. They rebelled before; they could do so again...
For his Event, Walker rolls 41 – a simulated investigation in 
the sim halls goes awry. Walker must roll Investigate, Street 
Perception 10+ or Streetwise 10+; since he has 1 in all three 
skills, it matters little but at least he has that choice. His roll 
is 3! Even with his talent for understanding investigative 
techniques he must roll on the Mishap table again, this time 
throwing 8. The exercise involves apprehending a perp: 
Walker has no option but to shoot the criminal in the back, 
which goes against his training. He needs to throw End 8+ to 
steel himself and make the shot: he rolls 7. At the last instant, 
Walker ﬁ res high and the perp gets away – to potentially kill 
again. Walker is hauled once more before the Principal who 
interrogates him on why he let a violent offender – albeit a 
robot simulation – escape when justice was needed. Walker 
knows this is serious; he must roll In ﬂ uence 8+ to get his 
argument across forcefully enough to evade expulsion. The 
dice are rolled and Walker rolls 7. Fortunately, his Inf DM 
is +1 and he manages – just – to explain his reasons. The 
Principal shakes his head, makes some notes in a pink-
splotched ﬁ le and dismisses Walker back to his studies.
This Term, Walker also has to take the hazardous Hotdog 
Run. Because he failed his Survival roll this Term, he 
receives a –2 penalty to his roll on the Outcome table. He 
scores a 9, which brings his result down to 7. Cadet Walker 
meets a mutant leader called Sad Bob (the mutation is fairly 
self explanatory) who becomes a Contact.
So, after an eventful Term Three, Walker looks like this:
Str 5 (–1), Dex 8 (+0), End 8 (+0), Int 6 (+0), Inf 11 (+1).
Athletics (co-ordination) 1, Computers 1, Drive (Lawmaster) 
2, Gun Combat (Lawgiver) 2, Investigate 1, Law 2, Mega-
City One Geography 1, Melee (bludgeon) 1, Melee (unarmed 
combat) 1, Street Perception 1, Streetwise 1, Survival 1
Special Techniques: Combat Acuity
Hates Robots.
Contact: Sad Bob (Mutant)
Term Four
The ﬁ nal Term. Basic training brings Walker levels in Law, 
Street Perception and Survival. For his development, 
Walker gains one roll on the Skills, Personal Development 
and Special Techniques tables. His results are: Jack of All 
Trades 1 (Personal Development), Formidable Presence 
(Special Technique) and Interrogation 1 (Skill). Clearly his 
Inﬂ uence, coupled with his skills in Interrogation, make 
Walker an imposing presence as a Judge.
For Survival, Walker needs to roll Inf 8+. His throw is 7 and 
he is forced to roll on the Mishap table. The result is 10 – 
once again, during a training exercise, Walker has problems 
applying the law. He needs to roll Law 10+ to get through 
this – the dice return 8 and Walker’s Law 3 take him to 11 
– he manages to sentence the offending perp (the same 
robot he let go last Term) to 40 years in the Iso-Cubes for a 
whole litany of offences. The Principal, who is watching the 
exercise on the vid screens, nods his approval and makes 
some more notes in that pink-blotched ﬁ le.

===PAGE 45===
 Academy Of Law
44
Walker’s Event result is 46: Walker is rewarded with an 
unsolved case to test his Investigate skill. The case is a 
series of unsolved robberies from six years ago that have 
bafﬂ ed the Judges. Walker needs to roll Investigate 10+. He 
rolls 10 and his skill DM takes this to 11. Walker’s insight and 
investigative technique sheds new light on a suspect who 
was dismissed. His tutors are pleased and Walker gains one 
skill choice from Deception, Investigate or Social Sciences 
(psychology). He chooses Investigate, further consolidating 
his skills.
So, at the end of his last Term at the Academy, Walker looks 
like this:
Str 5 (–1), Dex 8 (+0), End 8 (+0), Int 6 (+0), Inf 11 (+1).
Athletics (co-ordination) 1, Computers 1, Drive (Lawmaster) 
2, Gun Combat (Lawgiver) 2, Interrogation 1, Investigate 
2, Jack of All Trades 1, Law 3, Mega-City One Geography 
1, Melee (bludgeon) 1, Melee (unarmed combat) 1, Street 
Perception 2, Streetwise 1, Survival 2
Special Techniques: Formidable Presence, Combat Acuity
Hates Robots.
Contact: Sad Bob (Mutant)
Full Eagle Day
This is the day Walker has been working towards. His 
assessing Judge, Gant, is moderate in his attitude towards 
cadets, so Walker gains no bonus or penalty to his Full Eagle 
Survival roll of 9+. He does, however, gain an overall DM of 
+7 for his Gun Combat (Lawgiver) and Law skills and for his 
highest skill not listed for the Street Judges (Walker has a 
number of skills at level 2) – so, to pass Full Eagle Day, he 
needs to roll 1 or more. His roll is 8: Walker works diligently, 
applies the law, shoots a ﬂ eeing perp in the thigh, catches a 
slowster on the skedway and convinces Judge Gant that this 
young man with the serious attitude is everything a Judge 
needs to be.
Walker gains his Full Eagle and, along with Cisco and Strom, 
passes out of the Academy of Justice to take his place on 
Mega-City One’s streets.
Seasoned Judge
As Walker is going to be a Seasoned Judge, the Referee 
allows him to go through two Terms of the Seasoned Judge 
process. Before that, though, Walker, Cisco and Strom need 
to formalise Connections. As Walker has one connection 
each for Cisco and Strom, he gains 2 skills. He can raise 
existing skills but not above 3 or take new ones, at 0. Walker 
decides to take Computers and Mega-City One Geography 
(giving him 2 levels in each).
For his ﬁ rst Term out on the streets, Walker’s Survival roll 
is End 8+. His result is 3 – so once more, Judge Walker 
is checking for Mishaps. The roll on the Mishap Table is 7 
– and innocent citizen gets caught in the cross ﬁ re between 
Judge Walker and Zebedee Wit-Nolan, the infamous Mo-
Pad highwayman. The poor sap who caught Walker’s stray 
bullet was Delores Compound, a beautician who cruised 
the skedways selling makeovers from her mobile cosmetics 
salon. As a result, Walker makes Enemies from four of her 
customers who are convinced Walker has doomed them to 
ugliness. Back at the Sector House, Judge Walker has to 
prove that the death was an accident by throwing Inf+Law  
10+. Walker has a combined DM for these skills of +4, so 
he needs to throw a 6, which he makes with ease (rolling 
an 8). Delores Compound’s death was a terrible accident 
and Walker accepts that, occasionally, the innocent are 
casualties of the justice process. However Delores’s 
incandescent customers want Judge Walker’s badge – they 
may make trouble at a later date.
The Mishap over, Walker’s skill package for his ﬁ rst Term of 
active service is 5 points be distributed across his skills, as 
discussed on page 40. He decides to spend 2 points raising 
Athletics (Co-ordination) to 2 and the remaining 3 points on 
the Crowd Control Special Technique.
He has also developed 1 Ally, 1 Contact and 1 Informer.
His second Term as a seasoned Judge see a further 
Survival roll of End 8+. He rolls 4 (and, by now, Walker is 
worried that painting those robots pink might have jinxed 
him) with a Mishap table result of 9. Walker arrests an 
illegal Boinger® who claims he was prescribed the activity 
by his doctor and should therefore be treated with leniency. 
Judge Walker sentenced the perp to ﬁ ve years in the 
cubes but he must attend the appeal hearing at the Sector 
House where the perp’s doctor, lawyer and therapist have 
gathered to deride the harshness of the sentence. Outside, 
Delores Compound’s supporters, all wearing masks to cover 
their increasing hideousness, wave ‘Down With Walker!’ 
placards. Walker must throw Law 10+ to prove the sentence 
was justiﬁ ed. His roll is 2, which, with his Law DM of 3 only 
gives him a 5. The perp wins the appeal and the sentence is 
commuted to 6 months, and Walker’s In ﬂ uence is reduced 
by 1 point. Outside, Delores’s supporters go wild and Judge 
Walker is forced to walk past them, fuming but knowing that, 
as a Judge, he cannot argue with the Law.
For the last time, Walker has 5 points to improve his skills. 
He decides to increase his Strength by 1 point, which costs 
2 of his skill points and to increase his Melee (unarmed 
combat) to 2, for a further 2 points. He spends his last point 
on developing Leadership 0.

===PAGE 46===
 Academy Of Law
 Academy Of Law
45
Judge Walker is now 28 years old, has been a serving Judge for eight years, is pursued by a 
crazed 
bunch of Judge-Haters who blame Walker for their increasing ugliness and dislikes robots intensely. 
His overall proﬁ le looks like this:
Str 6 (+0), Dex 8 (+0), End 8 (+0), Int 6 (+0), Inf 10 (+1), Edu 10, Soc 10
Athletics (co-ordination) 2, Computers 2, Drive (Lawmaster) 2, Gun Combat (Lawgiver) 2, 
Interrogation 1, Investigate 2, Jack of All Trades 1, Law 3, Leadership 0, Mega-City One Geography 2, 
Melee (bludgeon) 1, Melee (unarmed combat) 2, Street Perception 2, Streetwise 1, Survival 2
Special Techniques: Crowd Control, Formidable Presence, Combat Acuity
Hates Robots. Contact: Sad Bob (Mutant) Enemies: x4 of Delores Compound’s friends
Many years of adventure 
await Judge Walker 
on the hard streets of 
Mega-City One...

===PAGE 47===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 48===
 New Skills and Special Techniques
47
New  Skills
 Combat Engineering
The Judge is trained in the rapid construction of ﬁ eld 
fortiﬁ cations, large-scale camou ﬂ age, the appraisal of 
a structure’s ability to withstand enemy ﬁ re, landmine 
placement and removal and/or placement of passive ground 
sensors. Essentially the battleﬁ eld is the character’s to mould 
as he sees ﬁ t.
Specialities
Fortiﬁ cations: The character is trained how to build ﬁ eld 
defences from trenches to bunkers. 
Building a ﬁ eld fortiﬁ cation (trench, sandbag wall, etc.): 1-
6 Hours, Education or Endurance, Average (+0). Resulting 
fortiﬁ cation grants maximum cover equal to half Effect (round 
up).
Building a defensive forti ﬁ cation (wall, bunker, etc.): 10-60 
Days, Education, Dif ﬁ cult (–2). Resulting forti ﬁ cation grants 
maximum cover equal to Effect.
Finding weak point in enemy forti ﬁ cations: 1-6 Seconds, 
Intelligence, Dif ﬁ cult (–2). Character can ignore the cover 
DM of targets behind forti ﬁ cation, up to an amount equal to 
Effect. 
Camouﬂ age: The character is trained to camou ﬂ age 
vehicles, fortiﬁ cations and ﬁ eld sites.
Constructing sufﬁ cient camouﬂ age to hide a single vehicle: 
10-60 Minutes, Intelligence, Average (+0). Grants a Stealth 
skill to the vehicle equal to Effect until vehicle is moved.
Constructing suf ﬁ cient camou ﬂ age to hide a single small 
building or defensive forti ﬁ cation: 1-6 Hours, Intelligence, 
Average (+0). Applies a skill DM penalty to those looking to 
visually ﬁ nd it equal to Effect until discovered.
Hiding a doorway or hatch from view: 1-6 Minutes, 
Intelligence, Average (+0). Grants a Stealth skill to the 
doorway/hatch equal to Effect until discovered.
IEDs and Mines: The ability to place, search for and 
remove Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) and land 
mines.
Avoiding previously placed mineﬁ elds: 1-6 Minutes, Dexterity 
or Intelligence, Average (+0)
Removing an active land mine: 1-6 minutes, Dexterity, Very 
Difﬁ cult (–4)
Sensor Surveillance: The use and placement of 
specially crafted ground sensors.
Properly placing a ground sensor: 10-60 Minutes, Intelligence, 
Routine (+2)
Avoiding triggering existing ground sensors: 10-60 Seconds, 
Dexterity or Intelligence, Difﬁ cult (–2)
 Flyer (personal)
This branch of the Flyer skill covers the use of personal 
devices such as jetpacks, powerboards and bat-gliders – 
any form of single-user ﬂ ying aid, whether it is jet-propelled 
(solid/liquid fuel), anti-grav or, as in the case of the bat-glider, 
using thermals and air currents for lift.
 Gun Combat (Lawgiver)
The Lawgiver is a sophisticated sidearm with many features 
simply not found on standard handguns. Judges are trained 
speciﬁ cally in handling the Lawgiver to greatest effect 
(especially important, given the different types of ammunition 
the Lawgiver ﬁ res), almost to the exclusion of other handguns. 
However, a Judge can pick-up any other handgun and use 
it at a skill level 1 less than his Gun Combat (Lawgiver) skill, 
rather than at the –3 DM for untrained skill use.
 Interrogation
Judges are frequently forced to draw information out of 
sources that do not wish to give it – both perps and witnesses. 
This places the Judge in a position to use any number of 
methods to extract it. This skill governs several ways to force 
others to give up what they know – knowingly or not.
Specialities
Doubletalk: The Judge knows how to talk circles around 
most people, getting them to say or admit to things they 
never meant to with pressured conversation. With enough 
time to grill them properly, the character can get anyone to 
spill their secrets.
Badgering an admission of guilt out of a captive: 1-6 Hours, 
Intelligence, Difﬁ cult (–2). 
Uncovering a secret through focussed conversation: 10-60 
Minutes, Intelligence, Difﬁ cult (–2).
Torture: This speciality governs the collection of emotional, 
physical and psychological methods in which an interrogator 
can get a victim to break. Through an assortment of devious 
and unsavoury tactics, the character can get anyone to 
say what he needs them to. NOTE: Using this technique 

===PAGE 49===
 New Skills and Special Techniques
 New Skills and Special Techniques
48

===PAGE 50===
 New Skills and Special Techniques
49
against innocent citizens is a crime. It may be used against 
particularly vicious or dangerous perps if all other methods 
have been exhausted and the Sector Chief or Chief Judge 
sanctions it.
Knowing a true confession from a false one: 1-6 Seconds, 
Intelligence, Routine (+2).
Using pain or discomfort to elicit an answer to an inquiry: 1-6 
Hours, Inﬂ uence or Strength, Average (+0). 
Using emotional or psychological response to elicit an 
answer to an inquiry: 10-60 Hours, Inﬂ uence or Intelligence, 
Average (+0).
 Drive (Lawmaster)
The Lawmaster is more than just a hefty motorcycle: it is the 
workhouse of the Justice Department and a sophisticated 
crime-ﬁ ghting machine in its own right. A Lawmaster is ﬁ tted 
with a staggering array of devices, special adaptations, 
crime detection technology and weapon systems. The Drive 
(Lawmaster) skill therefore covers more than simply riding 
the most advanced road-going bike in existence; it covers 
the use of the onboard weapons and technology and the 
special riding techniques a Judge needs to use to get the 
best out of his vehicle. A Judge can use Drive (wheeled) at a 
skill level 1 less than his Drive (Lawmaster) skill, rather than 
at the –3 DM for untrained skill use.
Swerving around a routine obstacle: Instantaneous, Average 
(+0)
Cracking a perp round the back of the head with a daystick 
whilst keeping the Lawmaster under control: Signiﬁ cant 
Action, Average (+0)
Blasting away with bike cannon whilst travelling at speed 
and avoiding oncoming trafﬁ c: Instantaneous, Difﬁ cult (–2)
Skidding the bike under a low-hanging obstacle, coming 
through the other side and getting back into an upright 
position: Signiﬁ cant Action, Very Difﬁ cult (–4)
Using a ramp or other piece of debris to leap over an obstacle, 
chasm or span: Instantaneous, Very Difﬁ cult (–4)
 Law
Understanding the law is fundamental to a Judge. This skill 
covers how the law works; sentencing, exceptions, leniency, 
speciﬁ c cases and so forth. Every Judge emerges with 
Law when he graduates and undergoes regular refresher 
courses to remain competent; but some, like Judge Dredd, 
even study the huge and complex tomes of Mega-City Law 
in their spare time.
The Referee may apply a DM to the standard target number 
of 8+ depending on the circumstances. If, for example, a 
Judge sees a crime in progress, has witnesses and is in 
absolutely no doubt about the perp’s guilt, then a +4 DM is 
warranted. If circumstances are tenuous, based on hearsay 
or evidence is absent altogether, than a DM of –2 or –4 
might be warranted. For the most part, though, Judges need 
to roll Law 8+.
Sentence a perp correctly for a routine crime: 1-6 seconds, 
Very Easy (+4)
Sentence a perp for a more complex crime with different 
elements that might conﬂ ict: 1-6 minutes, Average (+0)
Assess a complex criminal case, with many disparate 
elements, each requiring separate consideration and 
sentencing elements: 10-60 minutes, Difﬁ cult (–2)
Assess the most ﬁ endish, complex cases, taking into 
account alibis, counter-claims, multiple, con ﬂ icting witness 
statements and clear expressions of guilt and mitigation: 1-6 
hours, Very Difﬁ cult (–4)
If a Law skill attempt is failed, then the Judge has failed to 
apply the law fairly and correctly, whether in interpretation or 
sentencing. Although appeals in Mega-City One are dif ﬁ cult 
to lodge (Judges are, after all, meant to be infallible), they 
are possible. Note the Effect of the Law roll’s failure. To 
successfully lodge an appeal, a perp needs to roll Advocate 
10+; he can use the Effect of the Judge’s failed Law roll as a 
positive DM to his appeal lodgement. If successful, another 
Judge reviews the case and adjusts sentencing accordingly 
– and may even set a perp free as a result. If the case is 
especially sensitive or contentious, the Judge who passed 
the original judgment may ﬁ nd himself called to account for 
his actions and even be subject to retraining, disciplinary 
action or, in the worst case, investigation by the SJS.
For example, Judge Madison has Law 2 and is sentencing 
a perp for jay-walking a skedway. The result of his roll is 2, 
modiﬁ ed to 4 for Madison’s Law skill: Madison sentences 
the jay-walker to 10 years in an Iso-Cube. However, this 
is still a failure with an Effect of 4 (4-8 = –4). The perp 
decides to appeal. He must roll Advocate 10+ but Madison’s 
overzealous behaviour has given the perp a +4 DM to his 
dice roll. The perp rolls 7; the DM takes this to 11 and the 
perp successfully appeals. Madison has some explaining to 
do as the perp walks free with a Cr. 1,000 ﬁ ne...

===PAGE 51===
 New Skills and Special Techniques
50
 Mega-City One Geography
Every good Judge knows the general layout of Mega-City 
One, its sector locations, old names and so forth and how they 
connect together; but you have an aptitude for the more detailed 
geography of the city, spending many hours pouring over the 
old maps, vid-displays, tri-dees and so on. The city’s layout and 
development fascinates you. This skill allows you to understand 
the geography of a particular district or sector intimately, recalling 
its layout and key landmarks/buildings without having to refer to 
your hand computer, bike computer or MAC.
Understand the general layout of a sector or area: 1-6 
minutes, Easy (+2)
Work out the best and fastest route between A and B: 2-12 
minutes, Average (+0)
Pinpoint a speci ﬁ c but unobvious building in an area or 
sector: 1-60 Minutes, Difﬁ cult (–2)
Recall the hidden, underground facilities, service shafts, 
tunnels and so forth, of a sector: 1-6 Hours, Very Difﬁ cult (–4)
 Mega-City One History
You have studied the history of Mega-City One, since its 
conception, right up to the present day (including all the 
wars, strange occurrences and, in particular, the history of 
its crime). This skill allows you to call on that knowledge to 
recall facts about a particular district or sector which may 
provide an insight into current happenings.
Recalling the general history of a sector: 1-6 minutes, Easy (+2)
Recalling a speciﬁ c historical event of a sector: 2-12 minutes, 
Average (+0)
Recalling an obscure, very speci ﬁ c fact about a sector: 1-6 
hours, Difﬁ cult (–2)
Recalling an obscure, very speci ﬁ c fact about a speci ﬁ c 
building, person or event: 1-6 hours, Very Difﬁ cult (–4)
 Street Perception
The Judge knows and understands how, to read the nuances 
of Mega-City One’s sprawling, chaotic streets. He can spot 
which areas are the likely hangouts of perps, when a Block 
War is likely to kick-off, when a gathering of juves is likely to 
result in a mugging and whether that illegally parked car has 
been strategically placed to assist with a robbery just about 
to happen. The Judge’s training has run through just about 
every criminal habit manifested and displayed in Mega-City 
One, its symptoms distilled and, through study, sleep training 
and simulations, the Judge is attuned to the environment.
Assessing the likelihood of a crime about to happen: 1-6 
seconds, Average (+0)
Spotting something incongruous that might signal something 
bigger: 1-6 minutes, Difﬁ cult (–2)
Getting the feel for the mood of a particular group of people, 
a city block and so on, even when all appears calm: 1-6 
minutes, Very Difﬁ cult (–4)
 Special 
Techniques
Special Techniques are the means by which Judges perform 
superhuman acts of dexterity, endurance and intuition, 
keeping them several steps ahead of the law breakers who 
would happily put a bullet in their back with a spitgun. Special 
Techniques typically modify certain elements of the rules 
(such as Combat) or augment certain skills (such as Drive 
(Lawmaster)). Others have more subtle effects. The description 
of each technique speciﬁ es how and when, it works. 
 Combat Acuity
The Judge is adept at reading the nuances of a tactical 
situation and greatly improves his chances of reacting ﬁ rst 
in a combat environment. He rolls Initiative on 3d6 rather 
than 2d6.
 Control Crash
When a crash is unavoidable, whatever vehicle he is 
controlling or a passenger of, the Judge is able to take the 
necessary steps to minimise damage to the vehicle, its 
occupants and innocent bystanders. The Judge is able to 
make either a Drive+Dexterity 8+ (if driving) roll or a Dexterity 
8+ roll (if a passenger); note the Effect:

===PAGE 52===
 New Skills and Special Techniques
51
Effect Result
6-7 The Judge uses such skill that the vehicle 
suffers minimal damage and all personnel 
inside and in the vicinity are unharmed.
4-5 The Judge signi ﬁ cantly minimises 
damage to the vehicle, occupants and 
all personnel in the vicinity; damage is 
reduced by three quarters.
2-3 The Judge minimises damage to the 
vehicle, occupants and all personnel in 
the vicinity; damage is reduced by half.
0-1 The Judge manages to reduce damage to 
the vehicle, occupants and all personnel in 
the vicinity; damage is reduced by a quarter.
–1 or less The Judge is powerless to prevent the 
crash. Full damage is sustained to the 
vehicle, occupants and all personnel in 
the vicinity.
 Crowd Control
The Judge understands the nature of crowds and mobs, 
being able to gauge their dynamics, ﬂ are-points and 
general tendencies to swarm. He can use techniques such 
as Formidable Presence and skills such as Persuade, on 
a number of people equal to his Inf multiplied by 10. His 
ability to project his authority into the crowd affects everyone 
within the Inf x10 range, assuming that he is also using a 
technique such as Formidable Presence or Persuasion to 
get the crowd to do his bidding.
 Data Access
The Judge is skilled in speed-reading, sifting and assimilating 
computer-based data. His mind acts almost as an extension 
of the data source providing the information, allowing the 
Judge to assess information quickly and accurately.
When using this technique, the Judge is able to assimilate 
and understand computer-generated data in a number 
of seconds equal to 20 minus his Int characteristic. More 
complex data sets might take longer; a highly complex 
case-ﬁ le might require 30 minus Int seconds or might take 
20 minus Int minutes, depending on how much detail is 
presented but essentially the Judge rapidly understands 
what he is presented with without having to waste hours 
reading and cross-referencing information.
 Dead Halt
The Judge can bring his Lawmaster or any other ground-
based/ground effect vehicle he is able to drive to a dead 
halt safely and under control. He does not need to make a 
Drive roll to successfully halt his vehicle and his senses are 
perfectly attuned to the circumstances around him.
 Dead Zone (Psi Judges Only)
Using this technique the Psi Judge reaches across the limbo 
of death and may use any power on a dead person or undead 
creature, treating the target as though it was still living. Using 
this technique costs an additional Psi point.
 Enhanced Power (Psi Judges Only)
The range for a psionic power can be doubled by the Psi 
Judge but the cost in terms of Psi points is +2 to the power’s 
base cost.
 Enhanced Talent (Psi Judges Only)
The Psi Judge chooses one power from any Talent 
permissible within Judge Dredd and adds it as a power 
usable under a Talent he already possesses.
 Formidable Presence
The Judge literally embodies the full majesty and weight of 
Mega-City law. His mere expression shows his command 
of both the situation and the facts at hand. Any Non-Player 
Character within a number of metres equal to the Judge’s 
Inﬂ uence characteristic must make a successful Endurance 
roll at 10+ or be rooted to the spot, paralysed with either fear 
and/or respect, for a number of minutes equal to the Judge’s 
Inﬂ uence characteristic.
 Inner Strength (Psi Judges Only)
The Psi Judge adds his End or Str characteristic DM (his 
choice) to any one Talent. The Talent must be speci ﬁ ed 
when taking this technique. If the technique is taken again, 
then a new Talent must be speci ﬁ ed. If the Judge has a 
negative or zero characteristic DM in Str or End, he gains 
a ‘wild card’ DM equal to 1d3. This roll must be made every 
time the Psi Judge uses the nominated Talent.
 Jerry-Rig (Tek Judges Only)
The Tek Judge can ﬁ nd a way to effect ad-hoc repairs 
using just the things he has around him and can use parts 
of a disparate machine to ﬁ x another. He is also able to 
rig two completely different devices together so that they 
work together, seamlessly; or to improvise the functions 
of one device within another (within the bounds of reason, 
of course). Using this technique takes 2d6 hours and the 
referee can increase this or set a minimum limit based on 
the circumstances, if he so chooses.
 Life Saver (Med Judges Only)
Med Judges are taught the advanced ﬁ rst aid techniques 
to save lives even when all looks bleak. If a Med Judge 
is confronted with a casualty who has reduced to 0 
characteristics (and no more than –4) through physical 
damage and can act within 3 rounds of the damage being 

===PAGE 53===
 New Skills and Special Techniques
52
inﬂ icted, he is able to apply rapid ﬁ rst aid that restores the 
injured person to 1 point in any one physical characteristic, 
snatching them from the very jaws of death, although the 
casualty will remain unconscious and requires immediate 
medical attention (through the Medic skill or a fully equipped 
Med Team or hospital).
 Oh, So That’s What It Does... 
(Tek Judges Only)
When faced with a piece of completely new or alien 
technology, the Tek Judge can, after studying it for 1d6 
hours, deduce its function. This is often accomplished 
through pressing various buttons, switches and levers but 
also involves a fair amount of standing back, sucking in 
breath and wandering around and around the device for a 
lengthy period, scratching his chin.
 Perp Sense
The Judge knows the signals perps and potential perps give 
out – even when they are successfully acting as innocently 
as possible – either just before or just after a crime. The 
Judge makes an Int+Streetwise (or Street Perception) 8+ 
roll. The Effect of the roll reﬂ ects the strength of the Judge’s 
intuition and accuracy in assessing the situation. Use the 
Perp Sense table below as a guideline.
 Rapid Aim
The Judge can aim and take bead on a target with lightning-
fast precision, even if the target is attempting to move into 
complete cover. The Judge anticipates what the opponent’s 
position will be and can lead his shot to make a precise hit. 
He must still take a minor action to aim, but he gains a +2 aim 
bonus for each minor action spent in setting-up the shot.
Perp Sense
Effect Result
6-7 The Judge is 100% certain that the perp has committed a crime or is just about to. He also senses 
what type of crime has been, or will be, committed based on the perp’s body language, mannerisms 
and any other vital signs (the bulge of a concealed gun; or an expensive chronometer on the wrist of 
a shabbily dressed mugger).
4-5 The Judge knows that the perp has just committed a crime or is about to and has a reasonable idea 
of the crime itself but needs further evidence to be 100% certain.
2-3 The perp is looking and acting as guilty as hell but the Judge needs to check with control to see if any 
crime has been reported and if that crime matches with the typical modus operandi associated with 
the kinds of signals the perp is giving out.
0-1 There is something not right about the way this perp or potential perp is acting. Detain and question, 
to be on the safe side.
–1 and less The Judge is suspicious but there is a lack of evidence for detaining and questioning the perp at this 
time. Might be worth additional surveillance or checking the area for recent criminal activity.
 Rapid Assessment (Tek Judges Only)
The Tek Judge is adept at immediately diagnosing a problem with 
a piece of machinery, based on knowledge, training, deduction 
and hunches. Repairing the problem still requires a successful 
Engineer or Mechanic roll but the diagnosis is always accurate.
 Rapid Diagnosis (Med Judges Only)
The Med Judge can take one look at someone and 
immediately understand, from a variety of physical and 
verbal symptoms, what is medically wrong with that person 
– be it Umpty Candy withdrawal, Stookie Gland addiction, 
Level 10 Rad Poisoning, and so forth.
 Recovery
Judges are trained to be resilient and work through the pain 
barrier. With this technique, your Judge remains conscious 
(but physically) inactive if reduced to 0 in two physical 
characteristics – when unconsciousness is the result for most 
people. He is also considered to be Seriously Wounded (see 
pages 74-75 of the Traveller Core Rulebook) if he has lost 2 
points from each physical characteristic.
 Sixth Sense
The Judge’s sixth sense alerts him to potential dangers to his life or 
the life of others, although the precise source of the danger cannot 
be spotted. If surprised or ambushed, the Judge always gets the 
chance to react, in a way most appropriate to the circumstances.
 Steady Hand (Tek Judges Only)
The Tek Judge maintains calm under pressure whenever 
dealing with delicate instruments, machines or circuits. He is 
able to ignore outside distractions, no matter how severe, to 
accomplish the task at hand.

===PAGE 54===
 New Skills and Special Techniques
53
The Judge immediately keys onto pertinent facts about a perp: height, colouring, hairstyle, gait and so forth. When tracking 
a perp through a crowd or into an area where sight can be easily lost, the Judge still manages to follow his quarry without 
needing to make a skill roll. A perp can try to shake the Judge off his tail but must successfully roll Dex 10+, with the 
Judge’s Dex characteristic DM acting as a penalty to the evasion roll.
 Track Perp

===PAGE 55===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 56===
 The Justice Department
55
The Justice Department places order and justice ahead of 
liberal concerns. Democracy, in as far as certain civilian 
positions are democratically elected, is at best tolerated and, 
at worst, crushed if it even remotely threatens the order of 
the city. Mega-City One citizens have few rights and lead 
essentially drab, meaningless lives that are blighted by mass 
unemployment, boredom and the bewildering pace of 22
nd 
Century living. Citizens are sel ﬁ sh, capricious, uncaring 
about others and largely ignorant of anything but their 
immediate concerns.
Without the means to impose law and order immediately 
and ruthlessly, Mega-City One would descend rapidly into 
anarchy – as amply demonstrated by the Block Mania started 
by the Sov Block Judges that heralded the Apocalypse War. 
Given even the remotest chance, Mega-City One citizens 
resort to their base instincts and only the Judges keep them 
from destroying themselves.
In such a vast metropolis – Mega-City One has a population 
of around 400 million – the only way to maintain order is 
to deliver justice and punishment swiftly and to maximum 
effect. A traditional court system would be unable to cope 
with the sheer weight of crime that would be forced through 
its apparatus and the delivery of a sentence at the point of 
a crime sends out a clear message and deterrent to other, 
would-be law breakers. Without the Justice Department and 
the Judges, crime would be at a vastly higher rate, quickly 
leading to a complete and utter social meltdown.
The Justice Department maintains control through vast 
resources. It is in control of the city’s budget, in control 
of its information systems and takes the crucial decisions 
relating to the city’s administration. The Judges who patrol 
the streets are the public face of the Justice Department but 
the organisation is immense and there is almost no area 
of Mega-City One’s operation that the Justice Department 
does not inﬂ uence or control outright.
This means that the Justice Department is supported by 
a huge civilian and robot infrastructure that is responsible 
for certain, non-judicial, administrative and operational 
tasks. The Justice Department has a dedicated civil 
service in addition to the army of Judges and specialist 
teams who ensure that the citizens of Mega-City One are 
kept in their place. This administrative function is largely 
invisible to the populace of the city and, indeed, to the 
Judges who rely on its support. But without it, the Justice 
Department would be incapable of functioning with the 
ruthless efficiency it displays.
Origins of 
the Justice 
Department 
–  Fargo
As the Mega-City gained momentum, the judicial system lost 
it. Due Process was too slow, too inﬂ exible and woefully under-
equipped to cope with the social conditions of Mega-City One. 
If the justice process was too slow, then the sentences it 
passed on those who broke the law were meaningless. Social 
liberalism and the prevailing attitude of rehabilitating, rather 
than punishing, had created a system where criminals readily 
sneered at the idea of justice. And, in the ever-expanding 
warrens of the city, it was increasingly easy for criminals to 
perpetrate their activities without fear of apprehension.
Eustace Fargo, a presiding judge of the old United States 
Supreme Court, saw the need for a radical new direction. 
Disillusioned with the crumbling infrastructure of Due Process, 
Fargo suggested a new way: judges moved out of the courtrooms 
and onto the streets, given the power and means to apprehend 
criminals and sentence them at the point of the crime, removing 
weeks, months and sometimes years, from the process that 

===PAGE 57===
 The Justice Department
56
had underpinned American society since before the Declaration 
of Independence. The old system was fair and just; but society, 
through the Mega Cities, had out-run its reach. Between 2025 
and 2027 the east coast of America was rocked by uncontrollable 
gang warfare. By this time Fargo had been appointed by 
Congress to the position of Government Special Prosecutor for 
Street Crime and under his regime the gang leaders and major 
perpetrators of anarchy were brought to justice. But the justice 
system was too slow and open to intimidation: every single 
defendant walked free. The beleaguered citizens saw the need 
for instant justice even though some in government opposed it. 
When President Gurney was swept back into ofﬁ ce on a ticket 
of implementing Fargo’s ‘New Deal’ for justice, the people had 
signalled their willingness to see justice being brought to bear 
in a new way. Under Fargo’s direction the ﬁ rst academies to 
train judges in the new form of justice were established but it 
would be 2030 before the remnants of the old judicial system 
would be swept away. The Judges were not universally popular 
and nor were they immune from making mistakes; but with 
brutal efﬁ ciency the gang wars were halted, those responsible 
incarcerated without having the time or opportunity to intimidate 
juries and, for the ﬁ rst time in decades, the war against crime 
looked like it could be won.
Fargo’s system ﬂ ourished under his careful eye. Judges 
were trained to be incorruptible and this included a monastic 
approach to their personal lives, controlling normal human 
urges so that they would be immune from the temptations 
of both cash and ﬂ esh. Regrettably, Fargo, being only too 
human, was caught in ﬂ agrante with Sequenta Tells, the Vice 
Chair of the Commission for Legal Reform. This discovery 
would be ruinous for the justice system and Fargo knew it: 
he took the honourable approach of putting a bullet through 
his head. This attempt at suicide did not kill Fargo, instead 
causing dreadful brain damage, but Justice Department 
could not afford for the world to know the truth. So, news 
of Fargo’s death was broadcast, the story being that he 
was the victim of a drive-by shooting whilst on duty on the 
streets. Fargo’s attempted suicide and brain damage was 
made a complete secret, even from the president; only the 
most senior members of the Justice Department – Solomon, 
Goodman, Judd and others – knew the truth and they were 
sworn to secrecy.
Attitudes to 
the Justice 
Department
Most people know the Justice Department only through 
the presence of the Judges on the streets and in the City 
Blocks. To them, the Justice Department is The Law and 
Protector. The Judges are stern, harsh but scrupulously fair; 
there to be supported and, often, admired. But to others 
– those who can be bothered to look past the four walls of 
their apartments and mopads – the Justice Department is a 
dictatorial organisation that deliberately crushes the human 
spirit in order to preserve its own power. The Judges are 
fascist bullyboys, wielding too much power. The city is 
beholden to them and therefore at their mercy. The attitudes 
of both the general populace and the small number of Justice 
Department deniers are undoubtedly narrow-minded; neither 
sees the Big Picture which is, curiously, all around them. 
Mega-City One’s size, diversity and complexity exist only 
because the Judges keep the forces of chaos at bay. And 
there are many sources of chaos: the disenfranchised and 
bitter mutants of the Cursed Earth; the criminal gangs who 
have never been more ruthless in their exploitation of the 
weak and gullible; supernatural and trans-dimensional forces 
that see Mega-City One as something to be destroyed; 
egomaniacs like Judge Cal and Owen Krysler; and the Judge 
Child, who will stop at nothing to achieve supreme power. 
The Judges understand their position clearly and appreciate 
how they are viewed by some sections of society; but they 
do not let it in ﬂ uence their role. Many may not like the way 
justice is imposed or order maintained but the Judges know it 
is essential. Every Judge, from the moment he steps into the 
Academy of Justice, is trained to recognise and understand 
that the populace of Mega-City One is too large, too diverse 
and too immature to govern itself in the old, traditional ways. 
Every Judge is taught to understand the inherent selﬁ shness 
of the ordinary individual and how to deal with it so that that 
selﬁ shness has the least possible impact. Each new crisis 
faced by Mega-City One strengthens the Judges’ position 
and, even though the Justice Department’s existence has 
been threatened many times in its history, it has prevailed 
on each occasion due to its stoicism and refusal to capitulate 
even when doing so would have been the easiest option.
Thus, the Justice Department is the ultimate symbol of 
unyielding authority, and is the most ef ﬁ cient and effective 
expression of it. It cares little for its own popularity but much 
for its ability to do the immense job it was created to do: the 
protection of Mega-City One.
Organisation
The Justice Department works to a set hierarchy that has 
changed little throughout its history – even during the turbulent 
times when the very nature of the Justice Department was 
called into question (the reign of Judge Cal, for instance). 
The diagram on page 55 illustrates this hierarchy:

===PAGE 58===
 The Justice Department
57
The  Chief Judge
The supreme guardian of law and order in Mega-City One, 
the position of Chief Judge is a combination of the political, 
military, ceremonial and judicial: every crucial aspect of the 
state is wrapped into the role. The Chief Judge heads the 
Council of Five and, whilst above the council in terms of rank 
and experience, the Chief Judge can still be vetoed by it and 
is bound, by law, to act according to the majority decision of 
the council unless it is split and a deciding vote is called for.
The Chief Judge is usually elected by Mega-City One’s Senior 
Judges on a simple ‘one Judge, one Vote’ system. No more 
than seven candidates can ever run for the position (and it is 
rare that such an electoral race occurs) and all candidates must 
be of a senior rank. Once elected, the Chief Judge undergoes 
a rigorous period of brieﬁ ng by the Council of Five to prepare 
him or her for the demands of ofﬁ ce. The Chief Judge is briefed 
on the location of the network of strategic operations bunkers 
buried deep beneath Mega-City One; the detailed orders 
necessary for committing the city to war; and countless other 
secrets regarding the city, its history and the relations with the 
other Mega Cities scattered around the world.
A Brief History of Chief 
Judges
Every Chief Judge brings a different approach and form 
of rule to the position. Chief Judge Goodman, a brilliant 
administrator, was a poor judge of character and easily 
duped by those close to him. Chief Judge Cal was an 
insane tyrant who manipulated many Judges (not least his 
personal cohort, the SJS) into accepting his increasingly 
insane and murderous schemes – including making his pet 
goldﬁ sh a Judge and sentencing the entire city to death. His 
successor, Grifﬁ n, was the Principal of the Academy of Law 
who fought against Cal and was elected to the position on 
Dredd’s recommendation. 
Grifﬁ n was an excellent Chief Judge, leading the city through 
many dif ﬁ cult times, including the Apocalypse War. It was 
this conﬂ ict that brought about his sad demise. Grif ﬁ n was 
captured by the East Meg invader, Kazan, and brainwashed 
into supporting the Sov Block invasion. Dredd himself had 
no choice but to assassinate Grif ﬁ n, understanding that 
although the Chief Judge had turned traitor, this was beyond 
Grifﬁ n’s control.
*Covert Operations Establishment
*

===PAGE 59===
 The Justice Department
58
After Grifﬁ n came McGruder. Previously, McGruder had 
been the head of the SJS and noted for her hard-line, no-
nonsense attitude. The only member of the Council of Five 
to survive the Apocalypse War, she assumed the position 
on Grifﬁ n’s death, leading the Mega-City One resistance 
and had her position con ﬁ rmed upon the city’s liberation 
and the end of the war. McGruder led the rebuilding of the 
city in the wake of the war and became popular through 
her efforts (the rebuilding effort naturally created jobs). 
However, despite her undoubted capabilities, McGruder 
was not without her ﬂ aws. She took a curiously favourable 
stance to Shojun, Warlord of Ji, a powerful psion who 
threatened not only Mega-City One but the entire world 
with his plan to raise the Seven Samurai. McGruder 
countermanded Dredd’s recommendation for Shojun’s 
assassination. The resulting massacre hit McGruder hard 
and she opted to take the Long Walk, even though many 
senior Judges wanted her to remain in post, remembering 
her undoubted strengths. Those members of the Council of 
Five who disagreed with her decision to leave the city were 
dismissed – McGruder’s last act as Chief Judge and one 
that showed that, for all her ﬂ aws, she was still a staunch 
proponent of justice.
McGruder was succeeded by Silver, the senior lecturer in 
Applied Violence at the Academy of War and a distinguished 
war veteran. McGruder appointed Silver to the Council of 
Five in one of her last acts in ofﬁ ce and Silver’s election was 
a certainty. Chief Judge Silver rapidly proved to be one of 
the most hard-line, uncompromising Chief Judges Mega-City 
One has ever enjoyed. Silver was completely prepared to 
use smear tactics and a bending of justice to clamp-down on 
the Democracy Movement of 2109, giving Dredd himself the 
power to bring the Democrats to heel. As Silver said to Dredd: 
‘On this one, you write the Law...’ Silver used professional 
agitators and blackmail to undermine the Democracy 
movement, turning a massacre into an anti-democracy 
propaganda war. This signalled Silver’s willingness to use 
ever-greater draconian laws against the citizens and it led, 
inevitably, to the death of an innocent young boy (killed by a 
citizen brain damaged in a riot-put down by Judges). Dredd, 
seeing how the law had been twisted and his own complicity 
in it, was left with no option but to take the Long Walk 
himself. Silver suppressed this news, fearing the impact it 
would have across the city and replaced Dredd with Judge 
Kraken, another clone taken from the same genetic stock as 
Dredd and Rico. These events precipitated the Necropolis 
crisis (see page 247) and led, inevitably, to Silver’s own 
death and undeath at the hands of Judge Death himself. 
This peculiar situation led to McGruder replacing Silver (who 
was executed by Dredd, having returned from the Long Walk 
during the Necropolis crisis).
McGruder’s second stint as Chief Judge was to see her 
abilities considerably diminished. Her time in the Cursed Earth 
during Silver’s tenure left her psychologically battered and her 
judgement was considerably ﬂ awed. Due to the deaths of the 
Council of Five, there was little to challenge her increasingly 
unpredictable decisions and even Dredd could not convince 
her to reinstate the council. It took an assassination attempt 
by one of her own robots to convince her that her time as 
Chief Judge was completely through. She ﬁ nally retired as a 
citizen and, ultimately, succumbed to Alzheimer’s Disease. 
She would have declined into complete senility had Dredd 
not saved her from compulsory euthanasia and taken her 
into the Cursed Earth to battle lawlessness and die a more 
noble, deserving death (something that was, like Dredd’s own 
resignation, covered up).
McGruder was succeeded by Chief Judge Volt. Volt was 
elected over the other candidates, which included Judge 
Dredd himself (Dredd ironically voting for Volt rather than 
himself). Under Volt’s reforms, the Council of Five was 
reinstated and a new, elected civilian body created, which 
included the abolished position of Mayor, to rebuild the 
city’s shattered trust in the Justice Department. Despite an 
outstanding record against crime in those sectors where he 
had had command and his radical social reforms, Volt was 
unable to prevent the Second Robot War of 2121 and Volt 
took the situation personally. Although a distinguished and 
able commander, the burden of wartime leadership was too 
much for him and at the moment of victory over the robots 
Volt took his own life.
After Volt came Chief Judge Hershey. A popular and 
distinguished Street Judge, Hershey accompanied Dredd 
on the quest for the Judge Child, faced-up to Fink Angel 
and formed part of Dredd’s elite strike team against East 
Meg One during the Apocalypse War. Hershey rose through 
the ranks to become a senior Judge and was part of the 
delegation that attempted to convince McGruder to reinstate 
the Council of Five – even though this was unsuccessful. 
She succeeded Volt in 2121, having been appointed to the 
role of Deputy Chief Judge by Volt the year before. Despite 
following Volt’s social reforms Hershey maintained a stern 
side and has shown that she is every bit as capable of taking 
tough decisions and twisting the law when necessary (using 
assassins against the leaders of Neocuba, for instance). 
However, she constantly relied on Dredd for guidance and 
advice and, in 2130, she repealed the anti-mutant laws 
that had banned mutants from residing within the city. This 
created a great deal of unpopularity amongst both Judges 
and citizens and a campaign was mounted to have her voted 
out of ofﬁ ce, to be replaced with someone more authoritarian 
who would reinstate the anti-mutant acts.

===PAGE 60===
 The Justice Department
59
Hershey was replaced in 2131 by Chief Judge Dan Francisco. 
Francisco was a Street Judge who was made famous by a 
24-hour reality TV show following his exploits. Due to his 
fame, in 2131, he was chosen as a candidate to run against 
Hershey for Chief Judge with the intention of bringing back 
mutant apartheid. He was put forward as a candidate by 
Judges Cardew, Sinﬁ eld, and Millan, and won by a landslide 
after the anti-mutant Norm Supremacists organised a mutant 
gang attack on him (in order to manipulate and rally support 
for Francisco).
The  Council of Five
Despite having been disbanded by McGruder and then 
reformed under Chief Judge Volt, the Council of Five has 
always maintained a symbolic and political integrity. The 
Council of Five acts as the advisory body to the Chief Judge 
and comprises of Senior Judges, often the heads of the 
Justice Department’s main divisions. The Chief Judge is 
responsible for appointing the council-members and may 
expel existing councillors and introduce new members from 
any division considered appropriate. Should the Chief Judge 
be incapacitated and no longer able to carry out his or her 
duties, the council elects an interim replacement until a 
formal election can be organised for the successor. More 
often than not, the new Chief Judge will rise from the Council 
of Five’s own ranks. On occasion, a Deputy Chief Judge – the 
Chief Judge’s most trusted adviser – has occupied a slot in 
the Council of Five, although Chief Judge Hershey replaced 
the Deputy Chief position with a Wally Squad operative, an 
individual with closer links to the common citizen than the 
ofﬁ ce-bound Division Chiefs.
The lack of the Council of Five during McGruder’s tenure 
demonstrated the absolute need for the of ﬁ ce. Had the 
council been in place during Silver’s tenure, it is likely that his 
draconian war against democracy would never have been 
allowed to manifest. The council provides valuable checks 
and balances against executive decision-making and to be 
completely effective it requires as wide a representation as 
possible and naturally contrasting views. 
 Senior Judges
The Judges have no particular ranks within their divisions; 
there are no sergeants, inspectors, lieutenants or chief 
inspectors. One is either a Judge or a Senior Judge.
Senior Judges are awarded that title not necessarily through 
length of service (although that is a factor) but through 
their record of service. Arrest records, experience on the 
streets, knowledge of the law, knowledge of the how the city 
operates – all these things are taken into consideration for 
awarding a Senior Judge his title. Some Senior Judges are 
Becoming a Senior Judge
Judge Dredd characters can become Senior Judges 
although there is no hard and fast game mechanism for 
doing so. The Referee is the ﬁ nal arbiter on when a player 
character Judge is eligible for such a promotion and things 
for him to take into consideration are as follows:
Age: There is no minimum age for promotion to Senior 
Judge but it is highly unlikely that any Judge who has served 
for less than two terms (eight years) will be considered.
Experience: The number of four-year terms the 
Judge has served on the streets or in a specialist 
division. No Senior Judge should have served for less 
than two full terms but otherwise there is no speci ﬁ c 
lower limit and no qualifying threshold.
Arrest Record: Takes into account not simply the 
number of arrests a Judge has made but how many 
major arrests (for major crimes) and the diversity of his 
arrest record. Referees may want to keep a tally of the 
arrests the Player Characters make, in preparation for 
awarding the title of Senior Judge at some later date.
Competence: The competence of a Judge should be 
measured by his skills. Any Judge that has four or more skills 
at level 4 or higher is certainly eligible for consideration as 
a Senior Judge, the other factors being taken into account. 
Competence on its own is no guarantee of promotion.
Diligence: This is more difﬁ cult to measure but essentially 
diligence is how the Player Character has handled himself in 
respect to his role as a Judge. Has he always upheld justice? 
Has he applied the law fairly and dispassionately? Has he 
made any major mistakes that might have discredited the 
Justice Department, Sector House or himself? All these 
things should be weighed-up carefully by the Referee.
If the Referee believes a Judge has met all the above criteria 
– or even just some of them (but met them well) then he may 
award the character the title of Senior Judge. He may also, 
if he believes the character is worthy of the responsibility, 
award him command of a Sector House. If so, then the 
character can rightly use the title of Sector Chief.
Similarly, if a player believes his Judge has earned the 
right to promotion he can run through the above criteria 
and attempt to convince the Referee of his eligibility. If 
the Referee agrees, then that character gains promotion. 
However, the Referee’s word is always ﬁ nal and no 
player can insist on being promoted. Also, only 
the Referee can decide if a character should be 
awarded command of a Sector House; the 
player does not have the right to suggest it.

===PAGE 61===
 The Justice Department
 The Justice Department
60

===PAGE 62===
 The Justice Department
61
relatively young but they have demonstrated their capability, 
competence and dedication time and again in the service of 
the Justice Department and Mega-City One. Foremost of the 
Senior Judges is, of course, Judge Dredd but he is not the 
only Senior Judge and his approach to law enforcement not 
necessarily typical of all Senior Judges, either.
Senior Judges may be, depending on their competence, 
awarded the command of a Sector House. Thus, each 
Sector of Mega-City One has a Senior Judge in command 
of its judicial operations. All Sector Chiefs are answerable to 
the Council of Five and the Chief Judge, reporting to both on 
a weekly basis. Senior Judges who do not occupy a Sector 
Chief position are no less inﬂ uential; they can be called upon 
by the Council of Five at any time for advice or an opinion 
and the Chief Judge frequently has her own body of trusted 
Senior Judge advisers (typically those who she associated 
with during her career as a Street Judge).
Only Senior Judges are allowed, following the Volt Reforms, 
to vote for the Chief Judge and they can also stand for the 
position of Chief Judge when it becomes available.
Specialised 
Units
 Psi Division
Justice Department research into the paranormal began 
early in its history. Evidence of psionic capabilities had long 
been suspected but scepticism within the government had 
meant that dedicated psi investigation programmes had 
been poorly funded and their results derided by the sceptics 
who maintained that, simply put, ‘there was no such thing’.
Fargo and his comrades were far less sceptical. Dedicated 
research into psionic talent uncovered, conclusively, that 
certain individuals are able to tap into the considerable powers 
of the mind and demonstrate considerable abilities regarding 
pre-cognition, telepathy, telempathy, and other unusual 
mental traits. The bene ﬁ ts of such talents to the Justice 
Department were considerable: the ability to predict crime and 
perhaps apprehend its perpetrators before they committed it 
was attractive, as was the ability to probe the human mind for 
evidence on guilt after a crime had been committed.
Psi Division was formed to identify psionic talent in cadets, 
develop that talent and then use it to establish an elite team 
of Judges who would use their powers to support the judicial 
process – both in the prediction and solving of crime but also 
wide-scale threats to the city.
All cadets are tested for psionic talent. Those demonstrating 
it can opt to become Psi Division Judges. If so, their career 
path is dedicated to the development of their powers and, 
following graduation, supporting the Justice Department 
through applying their powers to crime prediction, prevention 
and solving.
Psi Division’s nominal base is within the Hall of Justice 
but it has its own dedicated facilities – where psi talent is 
exclusively trained – elsewhere in Mega-City One. Psi 
Judges are stationed either at the Grand Hall of Justice (the 
very best, who serve the city as a whole), a Psi facility (for 
the development of psi talent and involvement in lengthy or 
complex cases) or a Sector House, where they support the 
Street Judges on everyday activities. Psi Judges are not 
numerous; despite the bizarreness of Mega-City One in the 
22
nd Century, psions are still a rarity but there are enough Psi 
Judges so that a squad of between two and twelve (2d6) Psi 
Judges can be stationed at a Sector House to support that 
Sector’s work.
All newly graduated Psi Judges are assigned to a Sector 
House for the ﬁ rst four years of their formal career. Here they 
gain the valuable experience of street life that is essential to 
any Judge. After that, they may continue to serve a Sector 
or may be transferred to a specialist facility for research and 
development duties. After a further four years and depending 
on how the Psi Judge’s powers have developed in that time, 
the opportunity to transfer to the Psi Unit of Justice Central 
arises. Taking this opportunity means temporarily leaving 
street service and becoming party to the deep secrets of 
Mega-City One and Justice Department. The centralised 
Psi units focus on monitoring the known dimensions of 
existence, conducting long-term clairvoyant research into 
potential threats and providing forensic psi specialisation 
into the largest and most important cases.
Of course, Psi Judges may remain in service at a Sector 
House and many do. Psi Judges at this level are of 
considerable beneﬁ t to the Street Judges in combating local 
crime. Psi Judges can and do, undertake active patrols with 
Street Judges but usually they work from the Sector House 
in a support function. Training and developing psionic talent 
is expensive and Psi Judges are not numerous; risking their 
lives on the street is neither advantageous nor a prudent use 
of their talents. But it is understood that, although Psi Judges 
are a rare resource, conﬁ ning them to backroom work leads 
to boredom and stress; active work on the streets, as part of 
a patrol team, is a valuable way of maintaining a Psi Judge’s 
effectiveness and maximising their contribution to justice.

===PAGE 63===
 The Justice Department
62
Specialised Psi Units
Working from the Grand Hall of Justice, Psi Division 
maintains several specialist units of its own, each focused 
on a particular area of psionic talents:
Pre-Cogs specialise in pre-cognition and clairvoyance. 
Their job is to concentrate on the prediction of crime, mostly 
high-proﬁ le cases and citywide threats. Their leads come 
from a variety of sources but mostly from visions senior 
pre-cogs have experienced which are then subsequently 
investigated and veriﬁ ed for accuracy by the junior members 
of the Pre-Cog unit. Once the accuracy of a particular 
vision has been established and more detail on its nature 
gleaned, the ﬁ ndings are referred either to Sector Houses, 
so that Street Judges can act promptly on the information; 
or directly to the Council of Five and the Chief Judge, if the 
information concerns city security at large. It was the senior 
Pre-Cogs who discovered the existence of the Judge Child, 
initiating Judges Dredd, Hershey, Lopez and Larter’s search 
for Owen Krysler across the galaxy.
Trans-D specialises in studying and monitoring the known 
parallel dimensions mirroring Mega-City One, in particular 
the Dead World, the place where Judge Death and the Dark 
Judges originate. Despite the proven existence of parallel 
dimensions, Psi Division still has very limited powers in 
entering or communicating with these separate realities and 
so its activities, largely conducted in complete secrecy, are 
conﬁ ned to monitoring and reporting on what is found – and 
whether or not a risk to the city is posed.
K-Unit is the team dedicated to the use of offensive and 
defensive psionic talents. Few Judges have the ability to 
use the powers of the mind for inﬂ icting mental, emotional or 
physical damage and, following the appearance of Shujan, 
Warlord of Ji, it has been realised that pursuing psionic 
talent to such ends is inherently destabilising and dangerous 
for the Justice Department. Nevertheless, when necessary, 
K-Unit can be summoned to use their combative powers in 
defence of the city or against certain powerful psionic foes.
Psyker-Unit monitors criminal psions – psykers – who 
are in the employ of organised criminal gangs. Psyker-
Unit uses a broad palette of psionic talents to identify, 
monitor and then report to Sector Houses, the activities and 
movements of psykers, allowing the Street Judges to act on 
the information. As many psykers have their own, formidable 
psionic defences, Psyker-Unit’s work is not always easy and 
it remains a full-time job for the Psi Judges who are assigned 
to its duties.
 Tek Division
The Justice Department has always maintained a healthy 
interest in the development and deployment of technology 
in the war against crime. This interest has diversi ﬁ ed 
considerably: Tek Division is not simply a division of 
engineers and mechanics but a talented and wide-reaching 
division of scientists. Tek Division involves itself in research 
and development into just about every scienti ﬁ c area. With 
the considerable ﬁ nancial reserves of Justice Department at 
its disposal, Tek Division has advanced scientiﬁ c knowledge 
in many areas ignored by the private scienti ﬁ c community. 
Tek Division has successfully investigated teleportation, 
dimensional travel, cloning, exotic disease, space travel 
and so forth. Working with the Med and Psi divisions it has 
made scienti ﬁ c advances that dwarf those of the 20
th and 
21st Centuries.
The visible face of Tek Division are the rank and ﬁ le Tek 
Judges. As part of one of the largest divisions of the Justice 
Department outside of Street-Div, the Tek Judge has the 
opportunity to pursue his technical training to almost any end. 
All Tek Judges spend the ﬁ rst four years of their career in the 
vehicle bays and armouries of Sector Houses, where they are 
engaged in maintaining and repairing equipment – although a 
few of the luckier ones are assigned to join street patrols where 
their unique skills can prove beneﬁ cial to many investigations 
of technologically advanced crimes. After four years, Tek 
Judges have the opportunity to transfer to a specialist research 
division where they become involved in speci ﬁ c areas of 
design, research, development and maintenance.
Specialist Tek Units
Weapons: The Weapons unit is involved in the research 
and development of the Justice Department arsenal. The 
oldest of the specialised Tek units, Weapons was created 
in the early days of Justice Department when it became 
apparent that President Booth was taking an ever-more 
dangerous direction to committing America to atomic war. 
Judge Fargo’s advice to Chief Judge Solomon was to 
prepare the Judges for war by concentrating on armaments 
and the tools for civil defence. That logic has prevailed and 
the Weapons Unit of Tek Division focuses on developing and 
improving all the arms and armament Justice Department 
needs in performing its role. Weapons Unit developed the Mk 
I Lawgiver, including perfecting the ability of the weapon to 
ﬁ re specialised ammunition and the DNA recognition sensors 
built into every Lawgiver’s grip, preventing non-Judges from 
using the weapon. The unit also developed weapons such 
as the sonic cannon, which is used more by Citi-Def units 
than Judges but which provides a valuable part of the city’s 

===PAGE 64===
 The Justice Department
63
defensive arsenal. More intriguing products of Weapons 
Unit include riot foam – especially successful in subduing 
the angered masses safely – and stumm gas, which is far 
more brutal in its approach to controlling civil unrest.
Vehicles: With such a vast area to be controlled and 
with such a complex highway infrastructure, the Justice 
Department needs the very best and most diverse vehicles 
it can develop. Vehicles Unit specialises in researching, 
developing and manufacturing new vehicle designs, reﬁ ning 
existing models and researching potential new prototypes. 
From the V-Unit R&D labs have come the Manta tank, the 
Land Raider and the ubiquitous H and P wagons. Vehicles 
also has an entire wing dedicated to the space ﬂ eet; the small 
compliment of starships occasionally used for long-range 
missions within and without the solar system. Members of 
the V Unit are all skilled drivers, ﬂ yers and pilots but also 
have the requisite skills for maintaining and augmenting the 
craft they are familiar with.
Forensics: The Forensics Unit works closely with the 
Med Judges to apply forensic science to existing cases and 
for developing more advanced forensic techniques to aid 
Justice Department’s work. Detailed medical forensics is 
the province of the Med Judges but technical and scienti ﬁ c 
forensics are handled by the Tek Judges of Forensics Unit: 
ballistics, computer forensics, vehicle forensics, building 
forensics and so forth. A highly motivated – some would say 
obsessive – team, with a highly specialised job, Forensics 
Units are found at each Sector House supporting local law 
enforcement, as well as having a headquarters at the Grand 
Hall of Justice.
Psi Sciences: Working with Psi Division, Psi-Sciences 
develops the machinery and science that supports and 
augments the work of Psi Division; technology to both 
enhance and restrict psionic powers. Psi Sciences are also 
responsible for Justice Department’s ongoing research into 
teleportation, time travel and dimensional travel, using the 
unique capabilities of Psi Division to inform the development 
and testing processes. Psi Science’s work is highly secretive 
and conducted in the fortiﬁ ed, shielded, underground bunker-
laboratories far beneath the Hall of Justice.
Space Sciences: Astronomers, planetologists and 
astrophysicists, the Tek Judges of Space Sciences specialise 
in the study of the galaxy. Their work has contributed 
much to the Justice Department’s ability to understand 
alien civilisations and has enhanced the effectiveness of 
Justice Department spaceships, such as Justice 1. A small 
department, Space Sciences tends to follow a narrow 
agenda and spends much of its time assisting other Tek 
Judges with their projects; but whenever there is a need for 
any Judge to make an off-world expedition, Space Sciences 
usually provides an assessment report and brie ﬁ ng for the 
Judges concerned.
Life Sciences: The Life Sciences unit concerns itself with 
the ﬂ ora and fauna of the Earth, particularly so given the wild 
mutations that have arisen since the Atomic War and the 
Apocalypse War. Life Sciences collects specimens, studies 
them and then extrapolates the results to assist with the work 
of the Justice Department. For example, the phenomenon of 
the stookie’s anifax gland, which reverses aging, has been 
widely studied by Life Sciences in conjunction with Space 
Sciences. The unit’s Mutation Studies Group is renowned for 
its understanding of the effects of mutation and how to handle 
those who use mutation to turn to crime. The biggest inter-
unit co-operation is with the Med Division: Life Sciences and 
the Med Division have worked closely on cloning research, 
brain and memory manipulation (as witnessed in the work 
done on Mean Machine Angel) and other areas designed to 
either enhance the effectiveness of Judges or manipulating 
the psyche of perps.
 SJS
The Special Judicial Squad is a semi-independent organisation 
within the Justice Department, responsible for monitoring the 
behaviour of all Judges within Mega-City One. Routinely, the 
SJS handles all complaints made against speci ﬁ c Judges, 
making recommendations to Sector Chiefs for disciplinary 
proceedings. However, the SJS’s fearful reputation comes 
from the power they have at their disposal when investigating 
a fellow Judge for corruption and murder – their authority is 
absolute and their jurisdiction all-encompassing. Even senior 
Judges are not immune to investigation, interrogation and 
arrest at the hands of the SJS if they prove wanting. The SJS 
usually operates as small self-contained squads of Judges 
charged with speciﬁ c investigations, though they have been 
known to assign undercover SJS Judges within regular street 
patrols in order to monitor the behaviour of Judges going 
about their normal duties.
The reputation of the SJS is well justi ﬁ ed; Judges who 
form its ranks are all proven hardliners with a track record 
for being merciless applicants of the law where standard 
perps are concerned and equally diligent when it comes to 
judging their colleagues. The SJS Judges are selected for 
their implacability, absolute dedication, complete loyalty to 
their division chief and obsessive dedication to rooting-out 
– and dealing with – internal corruption. Most Street Judges 
are wary of their involvement in any case at any level and 
rightly so: on occasions the SJS’s obsession with identifying 
and crushing wrong-doing within the Justice Department 

===PAGE 65===
 The Justice Department
64
has led to some rash and incorrect decisions. Many Street 
Judges would rather handle instances of Judge wrong-doing 
themselves rather than get the SJS involved directly, mainly 
because they can take the time to investigate impartially and 
thoroughly. The SJS would take a similar approach but their 
hard-line attitude means that minor, sometimes justi ﬁ ed, 
transgressions are twisted into unforgivable instances of guilt 
that send otherwise good Judges for a stretch on Titan.
Another issue with the SJS, and one that cannot be 
overlooked, is the entire Judge Cal incident. When the insane 
Deputy Chief Judge and head of the SJS, seized control of 
Mega-City One, the SJS became his praetorian guard: most 
were brainwashed into pledging loyalty but some were quite 
obviously keen to offer their loyalty without the need for 
brainwashing. In Cal’s reign the SJS became an instrument 
of terror, abusing their powers to a degree that would forever 
tarnish their reputation. After Cal died, deputy Chief Judge 
McGruder worked hard to restore the SJS’s reputation 
and systematically weeded-out all those who exhibited the 
excessive traits Cal exploited. Still, the whole Cal incident is 
remembered by many rank and ﬁ le Judges and there is the 
unspoken belief that, for all McGruder’s work, the SJS could 
be all too ready to adopt a similar, power-abusive position, if 
similar circumstances were to arise.
Internal Investigations
All Judges are subject to periodic Accountability tests 
conducted by the SJS. A Judge’s arrests and case ﬁ les are 
scrutinised and challenged and, if any questionable area is 
uncovered, the Judge is summoned before an SJS investigator 
to explain the circumstances. These interrogations are hard, 
uncompromising and often uncomfortable. The Judge is 
subject to constant lie detector monitoring throughout and 
the SJS probe into every tiny detail before they are satisﬁ ed 
that the Judge is clean.
To see if a Judge is subject to an Accountability investigation, 
roll 2d6 each year. If the result is a natural 2, then the SJS 
investigate. If the Judge has failed any Law check through 
rolling a natural 2, then that particular case is the focus of the 
investigation. The Judge must succeed in an In ﬂ uence 8+ 
roll to satisfy the SJS that no corruption or wrongdoing has 
taken place. If he fails, the SJS launches a more detailed 
investigation, going through the Judge’s entire arrest 
and case records searching for evidence that will build a 
case against him. The Referee should adjudicate such 
circumstances, either abstracting the results or perhaps 
using the investigation as the basis for a scenario.
Responsibility of Judges
No Judge is above the law. Any Judge who breaks the 
law, either unconsciously or deliberately, is subject to 
investigation by the SJS. Every Judge is obliged to report 
any colleague who is suspected of abusing his or her 
power or transgressing the law to the SJS Judge assigned 
to his Sector.
Of course, not every Street Judge ful ﬁ ls this obligation 
unless there is clearly no alternative course of action. 
There are numerous mitigating circumstances that could 
and should, be taken into consideration before a Judge 
is judged, and many rank and ﬁ le Judges simply do not 
believe that the SJS approach an internal investigation 
with this mitigation in mind. However, any Judge who fails 
to report a colleague’s wrongdoing is guilty of withholding 
information and perverting the course of justice and will, 
himself, be subject to SJS scrutiny.
Referees – and players – therefore need to look carefully 
at how their characters conduct themselves. Any Judge 
character who abuses his position is liable for an investigation; 
and his colleagues have a duty to report him to the SJS...
Disciplinary Action
Despite the assurances of the Justice Department’s Public 
Relations Unit, Judges are only human and very few will 
go through their careers without some form of disciplinary 
action staining their records. Each Judge is expected to be 
the perfect embodiment of a hard but fair judicial system but 
they risk their lives every day patrolling the streets, ensuring 
the safety of a population who, by and large, are ungrateful. 
When a Judge turns bad, if only for a brief moment, it is 
of great concern to the Justice Department and disciplinary 
action tends to be both harsh and swift. 
Whilst Judges have the beneﬁ t of a ﬁ fteen year long training 
program, players do not and so it is somewhat inevitable 
that minor transgressions of the law will occur throughout 
the game. However, it has also been made clear throughout 
the Judge Dredd game as to just what being a Judge truly 
entails and so players should make special efforts in order 
to curb more excessive behaviour. When a player in control 
of a Judge performs an action that is contrary to the nature 
of Judges and the Justice Department, the Referee should 
warn the player of the consequences of his actions. He may 
get away with nefarious behaviour for a while but, sooner 
or later, the Justice Department will ﬁ nd out what he is 
doing. It may even be another Player Character Judge who 

===PAGE 66===
 The Justice Department
65
informs the SJS or the Sector Chief of his activities. When 
a Player Character is caught by the Justice Department 
performing actions that are unbecoming of a Judge, the 
Referee has four options of disciplinary action that he can 
impose upon the player, each depending on the severity of 
his transgressions:
Penal Colony of  Titan
This is the dread sentence every Judge fears. With a 
minimum sentence of twenty years, criminal Judges are 
sent to the penal colony on the moon of Titan to serve an 
agonising term of hard labour. Humans cannot breathe 
the thin, almost non-existent, atmosphere of Titan and 
so prisoners are biologically modified to function in this 
harsh, cold environment. Upon completing their sentence, 
prisoners are returned to earth, where they are carefully 
watched by the Justice Department as they try to adapt to 
becoming normal citizens and leave behind their shattered 
lives. Servitude on Titan is generally reserved only for 
the most heinous of crimes: treason, mass murder and 
murder of a fellow Judge. Any Player Character Judge 
sent to Titan is generally assumed to have been removed 
from the campaign.
Cursed Earth Penal Work 
Camps
With a minimum sentence of ten years, it is believed in the 
higher circles of the Justice Department that imprisonment 
within a Cursed Earth penal camp is somewhat less harsh 
than Titan, though prisoners may not be so sure. Frequent 
rad-storms and raids by mutant gangs can often end a 
prisoner’s life in the most brutal of ways and the hard labour 
forced upon them claims still more. Upon returning to Mega-
City One, prisoners are vetted by the Justice Department to 
ensure they have picked up no Cursed Earth infections or 
mutations but are then left to fend for themselves as ordinary 
citizens. Imprisonment within the penal camps is usually 
reserved for blatant transgressions of the Law - accepting 
bribes, torturing citizens and embezzling Justice Department 
funds can all earn a Judge a place in the Cursed Earth, 
As with servitude on Titan, any Player Character Judge 
assigned to a penal camp may be assumed to have been 
removed from the campaign.
Discharge
Judges not convicted of actual crimes may still be discharged 
from the Justice Department. This is usually the course of 
action taken for Judges who ﬂ agrantly disobey regulations, 
such as having a love affair with a citizen or fellow Judge 
or who simply fail to make the grade as a worthy Judge 
despite their years of training. Such Judges, whilst no longer 
permitted to take the law to the streets, are often offered 
auxiliary positions within the Public Surveillance Unit or as 
aides to Sector Chiefs, though some opt to leave the Justice 
Department altogether and adopt the life of a citizen. In very 
rare cases, a Judge with a previously exemplary record may 
not be discharged and instead reprimanded. Any Judge 
discharged from the Justice Department is assumed to have 
been removed from the game unless every Player Character 
Judge is simultaneously discharged
 for gross negligence.
The  Long Walk
Where a Judge has clearly exhibited an error of judgement 
that does not warrant a criminal penalty – or if he simply 
decides that he cannot serve on the streets to the best of his 
ability any longer – he can opt to take the Long Walk.
Equipped with his Lawgiver and a shoulder-arm of his own 
choice, the Judge leaves Mega-City One via the Sector One 
gate and strides, alone, into the Cursed Earth, ostensibly 
to bring justice to the lawless masses of the American 
wastelands. If a Judge is retiring honourably, then his walk 
out of the city is marked by an Honour Guard and a volley of 
Lawgiver ﬁ re. If he is taking the option for less honourable 
reasons, then his passage out of the city is marked only by 
those who choose to come and see him off. Taking the Long 
Walk (or being asked to think about taking it) is considered 
severe enough a penalty to atone for minor transgressions 
since the survival rate for most Judges is weeks or months, 
rather than years.
 Street Judges
The Street Judges are the rank and ﬁ le of the Justice 
Department. Its most visible presence, they are responsible 
for the routine enforcement of law and order on Mega-City 
One’s streets.
Every Street Judge is assigned to a Sector for a minimum 
period of 4 years. At the end of this period they may be 
transferred to a new Sector, in order to broaden their 
knowledge and experience or be retained at the existing 
Sector, to continue their good work. Some senior Judges, 
like Dredd, for example, are allowed ‘free street’ status; that 
is, they are not assigned to a Sector and are allowed to patrol 
Mega-City One’s streets under the direction of the Council of 
Five or the Chief Judge according to where the Judge will be 
most effective. For most Player Character Judges, however, 
a Sector assignment is mandatory.
Judges are expected to work semi-independently but it is the 
norm for Judges to be grouped into small teams of between 
3 and 6 known as Patrols. A Patrol works a certain area, 
performing a certain duty, for one or more watches (see 
below). The members of the Patrol are the ﬁ rst call for back 

===PAGE 67===
 The Justice Department
66
up and are expected to know where their colleagues are at 
any given time and to offer necessary support automatically. 
It is common for Patrol members to work different areas 
whilst on duty, rather than remaining in a group but how 
the Patrol deploys is down to its members to decide. If a 
Patrol includes a Senior Judge, then he takes command of 
the Patrol. If not, a Patrol Head must be assigned and this 
is usually a decision taken by the members of the Patrol 
with the Patrol Head role being assigned to a different team 
member each watch. Some Patrols do not switch their Patrol 
Head, having formed a comfortable working unit with a 
natural leader.
Day in the Life of a Judge
A typical day for a Street Judge begins when his ﬁ rst shift (or 
watch) starts. There are three eight-hour shifts within each 
day – A-Watch (beginning at 06:00hrs), B-Watch and C-
Watch (ending at 06:00hrs). These shifts usually begin when 
the Judge awakes from his mandatory eight hours sleep (or 
ten minutes in a sleep machine) and so each Street Judge 
will take two shifts in every 24 hour period. He breakfasts and 
then attends a compulsory brieﬁ ng session at Sector House 
control for a general overview of what he can expect to 
encounter in the sector during his shift, this being conducted 
by a duty of ﬁ cer known as the Watch Commander. Every 
Sector House usually has three Watch Commanders and 
once the brie ﬁ ng is over, Tac Group Leaders organise 
Street Judges into their patrol groups and assign them 
speciﬁ c duties or details. Unlike the Watch Commanders, 
Tac Group Leaders will oversee their colleagues’ activities 
on the street personally or by radio contact. Responding 
to the unpredictability of Mega-City One crime and Justice 
Department cutbacks, Judges may be called upon to work 
a second consecutive shift and sometimes twenty-four hour 
stretches are necessary. Under these circumstances, Judges 
are ordered to take ten minutes in the Sleep Machine prior to 
embarking upon another patrol. Drug stimulants are usually 
carried on patrol to counteract further signs of fatigue.
Duties and Details
Tac Group Commanders (always Senior Judges) assign 
every Patrol with a Detail for that watch. The Details and 
duties are summarised in the Watch Detail table. The Referee 
acts as the Tac Group Commander and may either assign 
a speciﬁ c detail or case, or role randomly to determine the 
activities for the watch.
Watch Detail 
2d6 Detail
2-8 General Patrol
9-12 Special Detail (Roll 2d6):
2 Block Patrol
3 Block War
4 Crime Blitz
5 Crowd Control
6 H Wagon Duty
7 Mall Detail
8 Pat Wagon Duty
9 Speciﬁ c Case
10 Surveillance
11-12 Trafﬁ c Detail
General Patrol
The Patrol is assigned to general Lawmaster patrol of a 
particular area within a Sector. Essentially the Judges are 
providing a visible street presence to deter crime and deal 
with spontaneous petty and serious crimes committed within 
their patrol area.
Block Patrol
As for General Patrol but the Patrol team is assigned to a 
speciﬁ c City Block where they patrol its levels, boulevards 
and plazas. 
 Block War 
The patrol is assigned to assist in quelling a Block War in 
their sector. Block Wars are incredibly dif ﬁ cult to control 
and require the full arsenal of a Sector House: H Wagons, 
Pat Wagons, Riot Squads, Manta Prowl tanks and so forth. 
A variety of tactics are used – from sonic cannon to stun 
combatants, through to surgical heavy-weapon strikes on 
the most recalcitrant and heavily defended offenders. As a 
result, the patrol may be involved in any and all of these 
activities.
One area of a Block War they will be involved with is the 
aftermath. Floor-by-ﬂ oor crime blitzes of a city block inevitably 
follow a Block War, with teams of Judges using lie detectors 
to verify who, and who was not, involved in the carnage. 
Tek Judges frequently accompany these patrols gathering 
essential forensic evidence which is used to support arrests 
and sentencing. Common dangers involve combatants who 

===PAGE 68===
 The Justice Department
67
refuse to lay down their arms and are prepared to take out 
a Judge or two if they cannot continue warring with the 
opposing block. Thus, Block War aftermath patrols are 
laborious and hazardous; and every Judge assigned to this 
detail is on perpetual guard.
Crime Blitz
The Patrol is responsible for conducting a Crime Blitz – a 
random, detailed inspection of a single citizen’s premises, 
looking for evidence of even the smallest crime and 
dispensing justice accordingly. A patrol works together on 
a Crime Blitz and spends the whole watch focused on the 
home of one citizen. The Patrol usually has a Tek Judge 
accompanying them for technical and forensics support or 
can summon a Tek Squad via Sector Control if necessary.
Crowd Control
Crowds are a frequent problem in Mega-City One: either 
organised demonstrations, crowds gathering as an audience 
for some performance or another; fan-groups of the latest vid-
star pin-up, and so on. Given the fractious nature of Mega-
City One citizens, wherever there is a crowd, there is trouble. 
Taps, rabble-rousers and the like are always attracted to a 
crowd, there to exploit the mass mentality in whatever way. 
And, even if petty criminals or troublemakers are not present 
or have been dealt with, crowds can turn ugly and violent 
for the tiniest of reasons (pushing, shoving, queue-jumping 
and so on). A Patrol’s duty is to deal with the petty criminals, 
watch the crowd for signs of trouble (and stamp on it) and 
deal with trouble when it inevitably ﬂ ares. Patrols can call 
on Pat Wagons equipped with riot foam for such incidents 
although, by and large, they are capable of dealing with most 
incidents without the need for heavy back up.
H Wagon Duty
The Patrol is assigned to an H Wagon, performing an aerial 
patrol of the Sector. The H Wagon is piloted by a member 
of Tek Division and the Patrol Team is responsible for 
responding to requests for aerial surveillance, pursuit, back-
up and intervention.
Mall Detail
Similar to General or Block Patrol but the Patrol team 
is located in one of Mega-City One’s vast, labyrinthine, 
shopping malls that are the size of a city block. Mall Detail 
involves dealing with shoplifters, taps, irate shoppers and 
unscrupulous shopkeepers keen to con honest citizens out 
of their hard-scrounged credits.
Pat Wagon Duty
The Patrol team is assigned to Pat Wagon duty; patrolling 
the streets aboard a Sector Pat Wagon and supporting 
Judges on general patrol or other duties. Pat Wagon duty 
can involve anything from perp pick-up and processing to 
riot control.
Specific Case
The Patrol team is assigned to investigate a speci ﬁ c kind of 
case or to support another Judge or team of Judges in an 
investigation. The Referee should decide the nature of the 
case (which should not be a routine, easily solved crime, 
where the perp is apprehended) and at what point the team 
is assigned to it. The team might be assigned as soon as the 
case is reported or comes to light; alternatively, they might 
take over from another team which is ﬁ nishing its watch and 
needs to be briefed on progress so far. The kinds of duties 
vary from case to case but common elements include:
• Interviewing suspects
• Searching for or processing evidence at the crime scene
• Following-up on leads
• Detailed surveillance
• Investigating possible linked cases or incidents
• Listening to and processing confessions and alibis from 
suspects
Surveillance
The team is assigned to surveillance. This may take a variety 
of forms:
• General surveillance of an area where a number of 
crimes have been committed
• Surveillance of a speciﬁ c building
• Detailed, round the clock surveillance of a suspect or 
witness in a crime
• Remote surveillance using Spy in the Sky drones, again 
on a speciﬁ c person
• Stake-out of an area that may be the scene of a crime
Surveillance details can be con ﬁ ned to a single watch or, 
by necessity, require extended watches to be effective. 
Surveillance can be routine or focused on a speci ﬁ c crime 
– therefore a surveillance detail might be part of a speci ﬁ c 
case (see above) although the Judges are not involved in 
any other aspect of that case.
Traffic Detail
The Patrol team is assigned to cruising the skedways, 
megways and other highways of Mega-City One, on the 
lookout for traffic and other road-committed offences. 
Much of the time is spent in the Lawmaster saddle, 
watching for speeders and slowsters, jay-walkers, 
aggressive drivers, road-ragers and so on. Judges are 
generally confined to the highways of their sector and, 
if required to give pursuit, must notify control if they are 
required to pass into another Sector.

===PAGE 69===
 The Justice Department
68
 Med Judges
Med Judges ful ﬁ l a triple role: the welfare and treatment of 
Judges and citizens (including perps injured whilst being 
apprehended); stafﬁ ng the Sector House hospital wings; and 
research, working closely with Tek Division and Psi Division 
on speciﬁ c research projects.
Though trained to be compassionate, Med Judges soon 
become hardened to the realities of Mega-City One, inured 
to the terrors the citizens can inﬂ ict upon themselves and the 
Street Judges. The majority of Med Judges can be found 
within ambulance back-up squads or toiling away within the 
hospitals of the Sector House across the city, working to 
heal Street Judges in order to get them back onto the streets 
as quickly as possible. 
The ﬁ rst four years of a Med Judge’s career are spent 
attached to the hospital wing of a Sector House, rotating 
duties between tending to the injured in the med-bays and 
working the meat wagons in attendance at the scene of an 
incident or accompanying a Patrol team in its typical watch 
duties (although Med Judges tend to be summoned to 
a scene, rather than there as part of a Street Judge unit). 
After this initial four year term, Judges can transfer to other 
Sectors and gain the opportunity to specialise, joining the 
research teams who work under the aegis of the Hall of 
Justice but are based at laboratories and research facilities 
scattered across the city.
Senior Med Judges are able to specialise further within Med 
Division, researching cures to diseases, terminal radiation 
and lethally concocted poisons. Within a street patrol, the 
Med Judge is the best ally any of his colleagues may have – 
his specialised skills can often mean the difference between 
life and death to a seriously injured Street Judge wounded 
in the line of duty. 
 Wally Squad
Justice Department’s undercover team, the Wally Squad 
is tasked with attaining deep-cover and penetrating the 
underclasses of Mega-City One, posing as a citizen, perp or 
potential perp in order to bring criminals to justice.
The Wally Squad Judges are often treated with derision by 
those from Street Division but their undercover operations to 
inﬁ ltrate the largest criminal organisations within Mega-City 
One have proved vital to keeping law and order. To become 
a Judge in the Wally Squad is to leave behind much of the 
training of the Academy of Law and few have the aptitude 
necessary to adjust. A Wally Squad Judge becomes, to all 
intents and purposes, a citizen and his old colleagues often 
notice a great shift in attitude towards the application of 
the law. It has been known for Wally Squad Judges to sink 
too far into their cover identity and ‘turn native,’ sometimes 
escaping from the Justice Department completely to take 
over and run the criminal organisations they were sent to 
destroy. Wally Squad Judges are never deployed as part of 
ordinary street patrols.
Wally Squad Campaigns
As Wally Squad Judges are fundamentally different to 
other Justice Department divisions (being in plain clothes, 
for one), it is recommended that every member of a Player 
Character group be a part of a Wally Squad team, rather than 
a single individual. This makes it easy to keep Wally Squad 
characters integrated into the ﬂ ow of play. Nevertheless, 
extensive undercover ops are an excellent basis for a Judge 
Dredd campaign, with their own dangers, challenges and 
issues in the pursuit of justice.
Other Divisions
Accounts Division
The Justice Department is the most powerful organisation 
within Mega-City One but like all great bodies it is dependent 
on a steady credit ﬂ ow to maintain a competent level of public 
service. The Accounts Division (Acc-Div) works tirelessly 
to maintain ﬁ scal records, balance ledgers, set the annual 
budget for Justice Department operations and enforce taxes 
charged to citizens. A succession of disasters over the last 
three decades has damaged Mega-City One’s ﬁ nances, 
forcing the Justice Department to curb its recruitment 
programmes and cut back on support for Street Judges. 
Atlantic Division
Mega-City One’s territory extends 2,000 kilometres across 
the heavily polluted Black Atlantic ocean, halfway to Brit-Cit 
and marked by the undersea service-plex of Atlantis. Atlantic 
Division is responsible for patrolling these waters, ensuring 
both Justice Department and civilian transports are protected 
from pirates, mutant marine life forms and freak meteorological 
disturbances. Atlantic Division also polices the Mega-City One 
docks under the auspices of the Harbour Squad. Despite 
having learnt many painful lessons from its defeat at the onset 
of the Apocalypse War, long-standing budget restrictions 
mean Atlantic Division has yet to upgrade the ﬂ eet (including 
the underwater SKUNK missile defence stations) to efﬁ ciency 
levels comparable with Brit-Cit’s own, smaller navy. 

===PAGE 70===
 The Justice Department
69
Wally 
Squad

===PAGE 71===
 The Justice Department
70
 Public Surveillance Unit
The PSU is the organisation behind Mega-City One’s 
millions of street cameras and Spy-in-the-Sky units. Its 
brief is to monitor the public lives of all citizens from the 
moment they leave their apartments to when they once 
more enter and lock the door behind them. Tek personnel 
assisted by robots sort through the information gathered by 
the cameras and then classify it as one of four categories: 
benign, suspicious, threatening or dangerous. A suspicious 
rating prompts further surveillance and a long-term archive, 
as will threatening but the latter often validates the passive 
involvement of Street Division operatives. A dangerous rating 
is automatically routed to Street Division so that immediate 
action – preventative or curative – can be undertaken with 
minimum delay. The PSU is headquartered within the Statue 
of Judgement in Sector 44, governed by a ‘nerve centre’ sited 
in the Statue’s rockcrete head. Though citizens are unaware 
of this, the location of PSU is an everyday warning to all 
Judges that nobody is above the Law. One day, their own 
indiscretions may be captured on ﬁ lm slug and used against 
them. For twenty-two years, Judge Jura Edgar was head 
of PSU. Her lengthy tenure and high success rate proved 
decisively that few were better suited to the role but her 
obsession for information-gathering overstepped its bounds 
when Jura tried to blackmail high-ranking Judges with 
secret information contained within the so-called ‘Cal Files,’ 
a legacy of the terrible deeds carried out by the tyrannical 
Chief Judge Cal in 2101. When Chief Judge Hershey came 
to power in 2122, one of her ﬁ rst acts was to remove Jura 
from her post and exile her to Cursed Earth Work Camp 17. 
Hershey subsequently appointed former SJS Chief Niles as 
the new head of PSU.
 Space Corps
Space-Div augments the local administration of off-world 
colonies populated wholly or partially by Mega-City One 
expatriates. Many of these colonies have been founded 
on mineral-rich sites creating a basic local economy and a 
foundation for trade links between the colony and Mega-City 
One. It is standard practice for the Justice Department to 
leave the more remote colonies to settle their own disputes 
but should they be threatened or attacked by hostile forces, 
Space-Div can provide a swift military response by way of 
the Space Corps, an army of Judges and civilian soldiers 
backed by a mighty array of weaponry including starﬁ ghters 
and deep space battle cruisers.
 COE
COE stands for Covert Operations Establishment – the 
undercover espionage wing of the Justice Department 
employed to counteract threats to Mega-City One and 
outlying territories by native or alien parties through the 
gathering of tactical intelligence that is then disseminated 
to other Divisions for further analysis. The COE is incredibly 
secretive – more so than the SJS – and it reports directly to 
the Chief Judge rather than through the Council of Five.
 Sector Houses
The Sector House is the base for Judges and the 
representation of law in each of Mega-City One’s 305 separate 
sectors. All Judges will spend at least part of their career 
stationed at a Sector House; each functions as a miniature 
Grand Hall of Justice and is the headquarters of personnel 
assigned to maintain the law within the boundaries of a 
single sector. Sector Houses provide temporary detention 
facilities for criminal suspects until they can be properly dealt 
with by the judicial system and holding pens for convicted 
perps en-route to the iso-cubes. Every sector house has 
interrogation suites, armouries, brie ﬁ ng rooms, vehicle 
garages, ofﬁ ces and communication and control centres, 
the latter being responsible for co-ordinating the movements 
and activities of all on-duty Judges, notifying them of crimes 
in progress and arranging the all-important back-up. Sector 
Houses are built like fortresses; spiked with artillery to keep 
the more dangerous citizen riots and lunatic fringe groups at 
a distance and, perhaps most importantly, to keep perps and 
suspects in so that they can be processed.
Some Sector Houses were built before the Atomic War 
and are easily identi ﬁ ed by their height, as pre-atomic 
Sector Houses stand at around ﬁ fteen to thirty storeys high, 
whereas more recent constructions start at around ﬁ fty 
storeys. All Sector Houses are built to approximately the 
same dimensions and can easily accommodate two hundred 
staff, though numbers of three hundred and above are 
sometimes crammed into their conﬁ nes to deal with sectors 
suffering from high crime rates. All Sector Houses have at 
least one large garage where Lawmasters, Pat-Wagons 
and H-Wagons are maintained and repaired. Most Sector 
Houses also have a hospital wing where injured Judges, 
citizens and perps receive treatment for the kinds of wounds 
and injuries that do not require immediate transfer to a 
hospital. The medical facilities are not extensive and Judges 
are kept isolated from citizens and perps but, staffed by 
the highly competent Med Division Judges, they offer good 
medical facilities for dealing with the kinds of trauma most 
likely to have been incurred during the application of justice: 
cuts, bruises, contusions, concussions, broken bones, stab-
wounds and gunshot wounds.
The Sector House is powered by highly efﬁ cient fusion power 
generators designed to keep the wheels of justice moving 
and these are isolated from the main grid in the event of a 

===PAGE 72===
 The Justice Department
71
sector blackout. A state of the art megaband communications 
centre located at the top of the Sector House ensures any 
reports of crime or information vital to the welfare of the 
sector can be instantly processed and relayed to any Judge 
patrol in the vicinity. Sensors built into the holding posts 
that proliferate across Mega-City One relay information 
back to Sector Control: that a perp has been locked to one, 
when, the Judge who put him there, and brief details of the 
sentence. After criminals are arrested, they are brought into 
check-in areas by Catch Wagons where they are processed 
and locked in sub-level holding cubes pending delivery to an 
iso-block where they will serve their sentence. 
The higher ﬂ  oors of the Sector House are reserved for 
Judges alone, containing brie ﬁ ng rooms, research areas, 
ofﬁ ces and, sometimes, dormitories that Judges can use to 
catch some much needed rest. The brieﬁ ng rooms ﬁ ll several 
times a day with crime reports and updates on the state of the 
sector while a few levels above are the of ﬁ ces of the Watch 
Commanders and Sector Chief, who is the de-facto Chief 
Judge of the entire sector. The Sector Chief receives regular 
– sometimes hourly – reports on the crime levels within the 
sector and, although the organisation of the Judges is left 
to the Watch Commanders, he or she sometimes orders 
for patrols to be quickly restructured in response to or 
anticipation of, local circumstances. The support staff of the 
Sector House are every bit as ef ﬁ cient and busy as their 
colleagues out on the streets: the information is constant – 
twenty four hours a day, seven days a week, never pausing, 
rarely ebbing.
Street Judge Routines
At the start of each watch, Street Judges head to the armoury 
to restock their weapons and equipment before attending the 
essential brieﬁ ng session for their watch. The brieﬁ ng session 
is a mixture of verbal address by the Watch Commander 
and direct information feed via the Justice Department’s 
advanced brain-interfaces. Verbal brie ﬁ ngs run through the 
highest priority items, allowing the Watch Commanders to 
take questions and stress matters of particular importance 
or urgency. The direct info-feeds are concentrated bursts of 
information concerning low-level matters, crime statistics, 
incident updates and other information pertinent to the 
sector. This is the conveyance of pure facts that do not 
require questioning but which each and every Judge needs 
to know in preparation for his watch.
Once the brieﬁ ng round (taking no more than ten minutes) is 
complete, Judges go straight to their assignments, details of 
 Sleep Machine
Sleep Machines were developed in the 
early years of Chief Judge Fargo’s tenure. 
It was readily apparent that dedicated Judges 
were skimping on rest and, even when able 
to take some rest, found it hard to wind-down 
from the day’s exertions. The Sleep Machine 
was therefore developed to cope with the 
kind of exhaustion many Judges experienced 
simply through dedication to upholding the 
law. Electromagnetic waves manipulate the 
brain’s natural activity patterns to introduce 
the equivalent of natural deep sleep, whilst 
other devices work on the physical body to 
replicate the relaxation experienced whilst 
sleeping naturally. Ten minutes in the Sleep 
Machine equates to eight hours rest but it is 
never recommended that the Sleep Machine 
be used for prolonged periods of time. Natural 
sleep is still essential: to maintain physical, 
mental and emotional health. If any Judge uses 
a Sleep Machine more than ﬁ ve days in any 
seven day period, he must roll End 8+, with an 
additional DM penalty for each consecutive use 
of the Sleep Machine (so, for example, using 
the machine seven days in a row would result 
in having to roll End 8+ with a –2 DM). If the roll 
is failed, the Judge suffers a –1 reduction in 
two, randomly chosen, characteristics. This 
characteristic reduction is regained once 
the Judge has spent a night getting 
proper, natural rest. 
which are communicated by the direct info-feed. If a Judge 
is being assigned to a speci ﬁ c case, he usually receives an 
additional verbal brie ﬁ ng by the Watch Commander and 
this includes those Judges (if any) who have already been 
involved with the case.
Off-duty Judges can grab food in the staff canteen, practice 
their shooting skills on the ﬁ ring range, enjoy valuable 
time off in the rec-decks or catch up on their sleep in the 
dormitories. If a major emergency beckons, ten minutes in 
a Total Relaxation Inducer (or Sleep Machine) will serve 
almost as well as a good night’s
 rest.

===PAGE 73===
 The Justice Department
72
Additional, 
Advanced 
Justice 
Department 
Equipment
The standard equipment of a Judge is described in the 
Equipment chapter, beginning on page 92. However, 
additional, advanced resources are available to Judges 
via their Sector House and these items of equipment are 
detailed below.
 Cyclops Laser Cannon
Though famous for its mounting upon the Lawmaster bike, 
many other Justice Department vehicles also sport the high-
powered Cyclops Laser Cannon for it is a truly versatile 
weapon. Given a much greater powerplant to draw upon, 
such as that found within H-Wagons, the laser cannon 
can operate continuously, without the need for a lengthy 
recharge time after each shot. For details of the Cyclops 
Laser Cannon, see page 102.
 Fire Foam Jet
Using the same ﬁ re retardant chemicals as the ﬁ re foam 
canister, the jets mounted on the ﬁ re ﬁ ghting vehicles of the 
Justice Department are capable of instantly putting out all 
ﬁ res of huge size or smaller within their area of effect. The 
ﬁ re foam jet ﬁ res its chemicals in a 20 metre long cone.
 Judge Hound
All SJS Judges carry the Judge Hound, a hand-held device 
that can track the ident chip contained in any Judge’s belt up 
to a range of 40 kilometres. If the ident chip is removed or 
lost, the Judge Hound can be recalibrated with a Mechanic 
or Engineer (electronics) roll of 8+ to home in on the Judge’s 
helmet radio transmissions.
 Riot Foam
Used primarily by riot squads, riot foam is carried in large, 
pressurised containers slung across a Judge’s back. A 
high-powered nozzle is carried like a ri ﬂ e from which 
a Judge may spray several perps simultaneously. Riot 
foam solidi ﬁ es on contact with air, holding any subject 
completely immobile and unable to take any action until 
freed with the use of specialised riot foam cutters carried 
in every Pat and H-Wagon. Though immensely strong, riot 
foam remains porous, allowing those held within to breathe 
freely. Any subject within the riot foam’s area of effect will 
be automatically held immobile, though it is possible to 
break free with a Str 12+ roll.
 Riot Foam Jet
A far more efﬁ  cient way of dispensing riot foam, the jets 
mounted on the larger Justice Department vehicles allow 
the Judges to immobilise a large number of perps at once 
without causing any permanent harm. The riot foam jet will 
automatically effect all targets within its 20 metre long cone. 
 SJS Helmet Radio
All Mk II helmets used by SJS Judges contain a special chip 
that allows them to tune into reserved SJS frequencies, 
kept far apart from those channels used by other Judges. 
Standard issue helmets are deliberately designed to be 
unable to tune into these frequencies, allowing the SJS to 
conduct investigations without subjects ever knowing they 
are taking place.
 Spy-in-the-Sky Camera
The thousands of Spy-in-the-Sky cameras spread throughout 
the city form the core of the Public Surveillance Unit’s arsenal 
of equipment used to monitor the citizens and Judges as 
they go about their daily lives. Small and discreet, the Spy-
in-the-Sky is a very small robot equipped with a strong anti-
gravitic powerplant and powerful telescopic lens which it 
uses to relay visual information back to PSU when deployed 
to monitor known and suspected perps.


===PAGE 74===
 The Justice Department
73
Evading a Spy-in-the-Sky requires a successful Stealth 9+ 
roll. The target number for the roll is increased by 1 for every 
additional Spy-in-the-Sky despatched to monitor a suspect. 
Once evaded, the subject under surveillance must continue 
to make a Stealth 8+ for every twenty minutes that either a 
sector surveillance team or PSU is hunting for him. If the roll 
is failed he has been picked up by a Spy-in-the-Sky and one 
additional unit is automatically summoned to make it harder 
for the creep to evade surveillance again.
 Street Cannon
The 20mm street cannon is one of the oldest weapons within 
the Justice Department and has found uses on many different 
vehicles. Aside from a few modi ﬁ cations to its ammunition 
feed, it has changed little throughout the years. The bike 
cannon found on the Lawmaster is a cut-down derivative 
of the street cannon demonstrating how truly versatile this 
weapon is. The larger street cannon found on other vehicles 
has selectable ammunition feeds, permitting them to switch 
between solid, ﬂ are and stumm gas rounds at the desire 
of the user. The ﬂ are round illuminates a circular area of 
30 metres and lasts for 1 minute. The stumm gas round is 
detailed on page 98.
 Zipper Bike
Developed for use in the low gravity environment of Luna-
1, the ‘Zipper’ Lawmaster hover-bike has made increasing 
appearances above the streets of Mega-City One as part of 
the newly commissioned sky patrols. The Zipper is heavily 
based on the chassis of the original Lawmaster and retains 
the trusted Cyclops and bike cannon armament, though the 
Notron powerplant is replaced with a super-charged Teka-
Tek anti-grav drive that can propel this bike through the air 
at far superior speeds to the Mk III Lawmaster. 
Dimensions
Height 1,156mm
Width 970mm
Length 2,700mm
Wheelbase —
Weight 180kg
Fuel Capacity 50 litres
Powerplant Teka-Tek anti-grav drive
Full Speed 600kph
Max Speed 520m/round
Acceleration 100m/round
Deceleration 130m/round
Cost MCr. 2.5
Statistics
Skill Flyer (grave)
Agility +1
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour 12 (saddle, fuel tank)
Hull/Structure 2/2
Weapons 2 x Bike Cannon, Cyclops Laser
Weapon Range Rapid Fire Damage Recoil Mass Magazine Weapon
Street Cannon Ranged (riﬂ  e) Auto 6 3d6+8 2 8 100 Street 
Cannon
 Stumm Gas Dispenser
Similar in design to the riot foam jet, the stumm gas dispenser 
found on larger Justice Department vehicles permits the 
Judges to pacify incredible numbers of rioting citizens in a 
short period of time. The stumm gas dispenser ﬁ res in a 
60 foot cone, with all living creatures within this area being 
affected as if by a Stumm round (see the  Equipment  
chapter, page 98). 

===PAGE 75===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 76===
 I Am The Law!
75
So, Judges have an immense amount of power invested 
within them. Appeals can be mounted but only with good 
cause. Usually, what a Judge says, goes and when he says 
you pull time… then you pull time.
To ensure that the law is applied fairly and justice served no 
matter what the circumstances, Judges spend a vast amount 
of time at the Academy of Justice and afterwards, studying 
the Laws of Mega-City One, both as part of refresher training 
and in their spare time. A Judge’s training includes the levels 
of training given to lawyers, advocates, magistrates and 
court-system judges. Every Judge has to be able to rapidly 
weigh-up the evidence, assess the facts, cross-examine 
witnesses, listen to whatever pleas or excuses a suspect has 
to offer and then arrive at the right conclusion. Judges spend 
years practicing these skills before they even approach Full 
Eagle Day and when they ﬁ nally hit the streets they are well-
versed in all the techniques, knowledge and assessment 
they need to employ when dealing with everything from 
littering to multiple murder.
Sworn Duties of a Judge
• A Judge is NOT an executioner – perps should be 
brought to justice and serve their time in an iso-cube. It 
is difﬁ cult to question a perp and arrest his associates 
if he is lying on the conveyor belt at Resyk. However, 
Judges have the absolute authority to respond with 
lethal force if a perp endangers a Judge, a citizen or 
Mega-City One as a whole. A Judge will only coldly 
execute human wrongdoers under the most extreme 
of circumstances: collaboration with a hostile foreign 
power, for example.
• A Judge should always use the minimal and most 
appropriate force necessary – do not use a Lawgiver 
when a daystick will do.
• Citizens may not be subjected to unwarranted 
violence.
• Perps must always be given a chance to surrender. 
Justice cannot be served if they are dead.
• It is the duty of every Judge to report non-sanctioned or 
illegal activities committed by their fellow Judges as a 
matter of course. No one is above the law.
• The full resources of the Justice Department are behind 
you at all times. You can query MAC for information, call 
in Psi, forensics or a riot squad. Just ask PSU to follow 
a suspect or monitor a vid-phone call or have Weather 
Control rain upon an illegal demonstration. Judges are 
not lone law enforcers – they have the backing of a 
massive organisation.
• Judges uphold and enforce the Law – they do not 
interpret it. 
• Judges have an incredible range of equipment and 
almost supreme authority. Do not abuse the trust the 
citizens have placed in you.
• Above all, do not use armour-piercing shells on a 
charging fatty, ricochet in a classroom, bike cannon on 
a crowded megway and do not annoy the SJS!
The  Law Skill
Whenever a Judge has to call upon the law 
for some reason – be it interpreting the facts 
of a crime, recalling precedence for a similar 
situation or crime, or even passing sentence, 
he makes a roll against his Law skill. For 
full details on how the Law skill works, 
see the New Skills & Special 
Techniques chapter, page 49.
Making an 
Arrest
Judges are not executioners. It is their role to police the 
citizens of Mega-City One and root out the bad elements 
that threaten life and civil order. To this end, a Judge may 
not simply take to the street with his Lawgiver, shooting 
every perp that crosses his path. A rigid system of law and 
order has been devised to govern the city and the Judges 
are the direct instruments of that system. When discovered, 
a Judge must make every attempt to arrest, sentence and 
arrange transportation of the perp to an iso-cube to serve the 
punishment for his crime.
The imposing authority of a Judge in full uniform is usually 
enough to make most perps surrender immediately, dropping 
their weapons and ceasing any criminal activities, leaving 
the Judge free to make the arrest. However, some perps 
are truly desperate and are willing to risk even the wrath of a 
Judge in order to remain free.
To successfully make an arrest without resistance, a Judge 
must present himself to a perp and issue a verbal challenge. 
Only one Judge may call upon a perp or group of perps to 
surrender at any one time. A perp must be able to see or 
hear a Judge in order for an arrest to be attempted. It also 
needs noting that a perp must be able to both hear and 
understand the Judge making the arrest – dumb animals 
and many aliens will simply not understand what the Judge 
is trying to do. 

===PAGE 77===
 I Am The Law!
76
Whenever a Judge attempts to call on a perp to surrender, 
the Judge rolls In ﬂ uence 8+. Applied to this roll as a 
negative DM is the perp’s Desperation DM (see below). If 
the Judge succeeds, the perp will immediately cease what 
he is doing, drop his weapons and submit himself for arrest. 
If the Judge fails his Inf 8+ roll, the perp carries on ﬁ ghting, 
committing his crime or evading the Judge – the Judge 
will then have to subdue the perp physically if he is to be 
brought to justice. Once a Judge has failed an In ﬂ uence 
roll to arrest a perp (or perps) called to surrender then the 
perp can automatically ignore all subsequent challenges to 
surrender made by the Judge.
Circumstances
DM to Judge’s 
Inﬂ uence Roll
Every additional Judge in perp’s sight +1
Every pat-wagon or H-wagon in perp’s sight +2
Every Manta Prowl Tank in perp’s sight +3
Perp in cover –4
Every ally of perp within sight and not 
dead or arrested 
–1
Judge is Injured –2
Judge is Seriously Injured –4
Perp is Injured +1
Perp is Seriously Injured +2
 Holding Posts
Once a perp has been successfully arrested (whether he 
surrendered or was subdued), it is standard procedure for a 
Judge to handcuff him to one of the (literally) millions of holding 
posts scattered far and wide throughout Mega-City One and then 
call his Sector House to send a Catch Wagon to pick the perp 
up for transport to the iso-cubes. Holding posts are made of the 
ﬁ nest plastisteel and are nearly impossible to destroy or escape 
from. A holding post is considered be able to withstand 100 points 
of damage and has integral armour protection of 12 points. They 
may be found on practically every street in Mega-City One and 
a Judge never has to travel further than 2d6x10 metres to ﬁ nd 
one. A Judge may, optionally, choose to wait with the perp until 
the Catch Wagon arrives. This can be time consuming and is 
not standard procedure but may prove prudent in the event of 
apprehending a particularly dangerous perp.
There are also those rare occasions, usually involving 
incredibly remorseful perps (and those with positive 
Desperation levels) where a Judge can simply order the 
perp to ﬁ nd the nearest holding post and wait for the Catch 
Wagon. This can be successfully attempted if a perp has 
a positive Desperation level and if the Judge succeeds in 
an Inﬂ uence 6+ roll. Usually, though, no Judge takes the 
chance and ensures that his perp is cuffed securely before 
ﬁ ling the sentence via his hand or bike computer.
 Sentencing
Before a Judge continues his patrol or current investigation, 
he must sentence the perp to a period of time in the iso-
cubes. The arresting Judge’s word is ﬁ nal for sentencing 
(subject to further evidence being uncovered at a later 
date and many crimes have variable sentences permitted, 
allowing a Judge to use his own discretion and still remain 
within the law); however, a Judge who is consistently too 
Perp  Desperation
Every perp has a Desperation level, rated 
from –6 to +6. This is a measure of how 
desperate a perp is to avoid arrest and thus 
how willing he is prepared to take extreme 
measures in avoiding it. Perps with high 
Desperation levels (–4 and higher) will stop 
at nothing to escape justice – be that taking 
hostages, endangering the innocent, risking 
shoot-outs and so forth. Perps with lower 
Desperations (–1 or –2, for example) are more 
likely to simply run and hide or perhaps risk a 
half-hearted shoot-out before surrendering.
If a perp has a positive Desperation – and this 
will be rare – then he is actively seeking to be 
arrested; perhaps as a call for help or because 
he genuinely enjoys the thrill of being caught 
lawbreaking, being reprimanded by a Judge 
and then being sentenced. Mega-City One 
has many such oddballs, such as Edwin 
the Confessor, who readily confesses to 
crimes he has not committed in the hope 
of being arrested and punished.
Additional DMs for Making an 
Arrest
In addition to the perp’s Desperation level, various other DMs 
are applied to the Judge’s Inﬂ uence roll when attempting an 
arrest, as the table overleaf details:

===PAGE 78===
 I Am The Law!
77
harsh or too lenient may well be investigated himself and 
disciplined. The guide below may be used by players to 
determine a suitable sentence for any perp they arrest, be 
it time spent in an iso-cube, a credit ﬁ ne (paid directly to the 
Judge’s Sector House) or some other punishment.
General crimes are gathered into Codes and then into 
Sections, with a Section determining the speci ﬁ c crime. 
When sentencing, Judges may quote the Code and Section 
to the perp (and must always ﬁ le this information when 
logging an arrest) but are not obliged to do so.
Code 1: Homicide/Sexual Assault
Despite the fact that life is cheap in Mega-City One, murder is still a heinous crime that the Judges do not tolerate. Any citi zen 
caught in the act of killing or attempting to kill, another, faces the stiffest penalties. Code 1 offenders receive no time-off for good 
behaviour and no parole; Life means Life, with their sentence served amongst similar offenders.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Premeditated murder of a Judge during the execution of his duty Life
2 Premeditated mass murder (spree or serial killing) 30 years-Life
3 Premeditated murder 15 years-Life
4 Prolonged abuse or neglect resulting in death 8-40 years
5 Manslaughter (unlawful killing with no malicious intent, accidental or incidental death 
caused while involved in lesser category crimes)
8-25 years
6 Rape and Murder 30 years-Life
7 Rape and Attempted Murder 30 years-Life
8 Rape 18-40 years
9 Sexual Assault 10-25 years


===PAGE 79===
 I Am The Law!
78
Code 2: Assault
Assault is a depressingly common occurrence in Mega-City One. Pent-up aggression is usually the cause and attempts to 
control it, such as the ill-fated Aggrodomes, have usually come to nought. Citizens are expected to control their emotions but 
many ﬁ nd that lashing-out comes all-too easily.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Assault of a Judge resulting in actual or grievous bodily harm 10-20 years
2 Assault of a citizen resulting in grievous bodily harm 3-12 years
3 Assault of a citizen resulting in actual bodily harm 1-8 years
4 Torture 8-15 years
5 Assault with a deadly weapon 6 months-2 years
6 Common assault or brawling 3 months-2 years
Code 3: City Security
The security of Mega-City One is paramount, particularly in the wake of the Apocalypse War. The Security of the City Act 
enshrines Mega-City One’s sanctity and it can be invoked by any Judge who has substantial reason to believe that the overall 
security of the city is under threat. This is never a step taken lightly and any Judge who invokes the act or the sentence of 
Execution (under the infamous section 34b), must be in a position to fully justify his decisions and actions.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Treason or Espionage Life
2 Any action likely to lead to citywide death and destruction Life
3 Collaboration with a hostile foreign power during wartime Execution
4 Interfering with a Judge engaged in protecting the security of Mega-City One Execution
Code 4: Robbery
Like assault, robbery is depressingly prevalent. With little prospects of a job, far too much free time and the ever-present 
pressure to have the latest of everything, many citizens are all-too ready to resort to robbery and piracy to gain what they want. 
The most careful robbers may even get away with their ill-gotten gains – for a while, but robbery, whether a carefully-planned 
heist or an opportunistic street mugging (or ‘tapping’) is dealt with harshly by the Judges.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Armed robbery with violence 18 years-Life
2 Armed robbery 10-30 years
3 Hijacking 8-20 years
4 Mopad Piracy 10-30 years
5 Looting 2-10 years
6 Tapping (mugging) 5-30 years
7 Wrecking 10-25 years
Code 5: Burglary
Even though Mega-City One properties are ﬁ tted with advanced security systems, burglars, particularly the clever ones, 
always ﬁ nd a way to gain access to property and its occupant’s personal possessions. Like robbery, burglary is met with 
stiff sentences.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Burglary 10-20 years
2 Breaking and Entering 8-20 years
3 Possessing equipment to be used for burglary 2-5 years
4 Trespass 6 months-3 years

===PAGE 80===
 I Am The Law!
79
Code 6: Theft & Theft-Related Offences
Minor theft and related offences receive a more lenient treatment than burglary and robbery but still harsh nonetheless. Casual 
theft, such as shoplifting and pick-pocketing (known as ‘dunking’) are a major social nuisance and offenders do not receive a 
warning or a caution; the appropriate sentence is levelled whatever the circumstances.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Shoplifting 1-5 years
2 Dunking (pick-pocketing) 2-5 years
3 Theft (unless covered by Codes 4 or 5) 2-15 years
4 Dealing in stolen goods 6 months-5 years
5 Possession of stolen property 3 months-5 years
Code 7: Arson
Although many of the millions of buildings in Mega-City One are made from ﬁ re-retardant materials or are equipped with 
ﬁ re control systems, arson is still considered a heinous crime that must be punished with the harshest sentences. In a city 
where 400 million people are crammed into high-rise spaces, the deliberate act of starting a ﬁ re is considered to be on a 
par with murder.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Setting ﬁ res with intent to cause death Life
2 Setting ﬁ res with intent to damage property 30 years-Life
Code 8: Medical & Scientific
The medical advances of the 22nd Century are astonishing. There is a constant demand for replacement body parts (the Resyk 
Centres recycle corpses legally, deriving 107 useful things from each cadaver) and internal organs, leading to a grim black 
market where people are kidnapped and have organs forcibly removed or their entire bodies sold to unscrupulous research 
scientists working on their latest insane scheme.
Mastering of technology at the molecular level has brought the ability for faces to be completely altered within minutes, using  
face changing devices. Of clear beneﬁ t to determined and desperate perps, this kind of technology is not banned, because of 
its clear medical beneﬁ ts; but is strictly controlled.
Additionally, cybernetics have been a possibility since the early 21
st Century, with cybernetic limbs and other enhancements 
available under specially licensed conditions. There are still those underground, unlicensed clinics where cybernetic modiﬁ cation 
can be bought illegally, giving certain criminals an edge on their competition and the Judges.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Unlicensed practising of medicine 3-15 years
2 Unlicensed experimentation 10-20 years
3 Unauthorised possession of controlled biological, chemical or mutagenic substance 15 years-Life
4 Body Sharking 15 years-Life
5 Organ Legging 15 years-Life
6 Body Snatching Life
7 Possession and/or implementation of banned cybernetic implants 3-15 years
8 Unlicensed Cloning 5-20 years
9 Possession of unlicensed face changing machinery 5-15 years
10 Use of face changing machinery to assist a perpetrator of crime 15-30 years

===PAGE 81===
 I Am The Law!
80
Code 9: Criminal Damage
Expressions of pent-up rage, as well as general impatience with ineffective equipment, are treated swiftly and sternly. Of 
particular annoyance to the city and the Justice Department, is the act of ‘scrawling’ – tagging public spaces with painted grafﬁ ti. 
Following the Marlon ‘Chopper’ Shakespeare affair, scrawling has diminished but occasionally ﬂ ares again, usually in response 
to some perceived slight or social miscarriage.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Robot Smashing 5-15 years
2 Criminal Damage 6 months-10 years
3 Vandalism 3 months-6 years
4 Scrawling 1 month-1 year
Code 10: Illegal Imprisonment & Abduction
The law is simple: abduct and imprison someone and you can expect to be imprisoned yourself. For all the lack of general 
liberty in Mega-City One, forcibly holding someone against their will (unless the Judges do it) is a major crime – as reﬂ ected in 
the sentencing.
One particularly abhorrent crime is the practice of Chump Dumping. Here, aliens are conned into visiting Earth (and Mega-City 
One) as tourists or refugees, paying extortionate sums to the runners who organise the passage. In deep space, the passenger 
pod of the spaceship is jettisoned, without life support, leaving the poor occupants to die alone whilst the perps pocket the transit 
fee. Chump Dumping tends to be controlled by the Mob gangs and other organised crime groups.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Kidnap (abduction with ransom demand) 20 years-Life
2 Chump Dumping Life
3 Abduction 15 years-Life
4 False imprisonment 10-30 years
5 Hostage taking 10-20 years
6 Incitement to kidnapping 5-10 years
Code 11: Civic & Financial
Water-tight computerised accounting and ﬁ nancial regulation, in the wake of the infamous ‘Credit Crunch’ of the very early 21st 
Century, means that most major ﬁ nancial transactions are controlled by incorruptible AIs and computerised systems that do not 
know the meaning of greed and take the most sensible ﬁ scal decisions based on long-term planning, calculated risk and close 
observance of previous recessions and depressions. That said, some citizens can get away with relatively low-levels of ﬁ nancial 
malfeasance, such as minor counts of tax evasion, but ﬁ nancial ‘white collar’ crimes tend to be few and far between.
Gambling, illegal in Mega-City One since its formation, falls into Code 11. But betting on the outcome of all manner of activities 
(rat ﬁ ghts, robot ﬁ ghts, dog ﬁ ghts, mutant ﬁ ghts, skyboard races, the vicious Mega-City 5000 bike race) still happens from 
slums, through shuggy halls to the penthouses of the rich and famous. The Mob controls a lot of illegal gambling through their 
devious ‘numbers rackets’ but often gambling is ad-hoc and opportunistic. TV game shows are exempt from the gambling laws 
but only because extensive and complex charters exist to ensure that pure chance and controls on the sums waged are ﬁ rmly 
in place.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Bigamy 1 year per count
2 Unlicensed adoption 1 year per count
3 Gambling 1-5 years
4 Tax Evasion Cr. 5,000 ﬁ ne-8 years
5 Blackmail 2-30 years

===PAGE 82===
 I Am The Law!
81
Code 12: Technology
Any advances in technology leads to an exploitation of that technology for criminal ends, no matter what the safeguards. Most 
technology crime is covered under other codes, so Code 12 deals with certain speci ﬁ c crimes, such as tampering with robots, 
building WMDs and computer hacking. Deliberately planting aggression chips in robots, thereby breaking their conditioning to 
serve and obey humans, is viewed with special severity following the Robot Wars.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Implanting aggression chips into robots 15-30 years
2 Illegal possession or trading of war or assassin droids 3-15 years
3 Unauthorised construction of weapons of mass destruction 10 years-Life
4 Computer hacking 3-20 years


===PAGE 83===
 I Am The Law!
82
Code 13: Public Order
Maintaining public order is a major challenge for the Judges. Riots and acts of mass public disorder ﬂ are all too easily in such 
a densely populated city, and one with 87% unemployment and unhealthy levels of aggression. 
The pinnacle of Code 13 violations is Block War, when neighbouring city blocks begin blasting the hell out of each other, ﬂ oor 
by ﬂ oor and with whatever weapons come to hand, for the most trivial of reasons. Block War is difﬁ cult to contain, owing to the 
sheer size of the city blocks, the number of citizens involved and the ferocity of the ﬁ ghting, and so Judges come down very 
heavily on Block War participants and instigators. Once a Block War has been halted, the offending city blocks are sealed and 
Judges conduct apartment-by-apartment searches, interviewing each and every citizen to uncover their participation in the 
fracas. Birdie lie detectors (as well as physical evidence – secreted weapons, spent shell cases, grappling lines, suckers and 
so on) quickly establish guilt.
Yet Block War has its uses. In the aftermath of the war Judges have the opportunity to investigate many citizens and thus 
uncover many undiscovered or unsolved crimes. And, as Block War tends to result in huge arrest rates, some city blocks 
become surprisingly depopulated in a short space of time, allowing the vast waiting lists of those wanting block accommodation 
to ﬁ nd block housing at long last.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Block War participation 15 years-Life
2 Rioting 3-15 years
3 Agitation and rabble-rousing/incitement to riot 1-15 years
4 Obstruction 3 months-2 years
5 Unlawful assembly 3 months-1 year
6 Drunk and disorderly Compulsory rehab + 2 years
Code 14: Public Nuisance
Crazes and faddish pursuits started out of innocent boredom or a need to create something new can rapidly turn into a nightmare 
for the majority who do not share the enthusiasm. Some pursuits, like Boinging®, are simply too dangerous when not conducted 
under controlled conditions. So it is that certain pursuits become classiﬁ ed as Code 14 Public Nuisance Violations.
The Code also includes activities, such as running on a moving walkway, which, whilst not necessarily an endangerment to 
others (but could become so), simply ﬂ outs the rules put in place to regulate behaviour.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Boinging® in a public place 20 years
2 Low level or dangerous sky sur ﬁ ng/bat gliding 3 months-20 years
3 Peeping 6 months-2 years
4 Loitering 6 months-1 year
5 Loitering with intent 1 year-3 years
6 Littering
Cr. 100 ﬁ ne or up to 1 year; 2-5 years for a repeat offence
7 Jaywalking 3 months-2 years
8 Running on a public walkway/walking on a public runway 3 months-1 year
9 Begging 1-12 months
10 Intentional wasting of Justice Department time 1 month-1 year
11 Smoking in public 1-3 years + compulsory detox
12 Incitement to commit a crime 1-12 months

===PAGE 84===
 I Am The Law!
83
Code 15: Traffic
Mega-City One’s roads are incredibly dangerous places. First there is the sheer complexity of the road system; satellite 
navigation systems and auto-control remove some of the hazards of this complexity but people still become utterly bewildered 
by the spaghetti-like strands of highway that permeate the city, sometimes several kilometres above the ground. Couple that 
with the sheer speed of some vehicles – and the fact that the roads are never quiet – and the need for draconian traf ﬁ c codes 
becomes apparent.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Driving under the in ﬂ uence of drink or drugs 5-15 years, plus life ban
2 Dangerous driving 2-15 years, plus life ban
3 Driving while banned/without a permit 1-5 years
4 Speeding, slow driving, lane weaving, light jumping Cr. 5,000 ﬁ ne or up to 2 years, plus a driving ban of 5-20 years
5 Driving an un-roadworthy or dangerous vehicle Cr. 1,000 ﬁ ne or up to 2 years
6 Parking violation Cr. 1,000 ﬁ ne or up 30 days
Code 16: Psi
Psions are not illegal in Mega-City One – after all, the Justice Department maintains its own Psi Division – but those rare 
individuals who do display psionic talents must be registered as soon as their abilities become apparent. A parent who knows 
their child is psionic but fails to register them is guilty of a Code 16/3 violation; not the child himself. Once registered, the abilities 
that the psion can use are logged and made accessible to the Justice Department via MAC. Using a power or talent that one is 
not licensed to use is a Code 16/2 violation.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Knowing or premeditated use of a psionic or psychic ability to cause injury or death 30 years-Life
2 Unauthorised use of psionic or psychic abilities 5-15 years
3 Unregistered psionic or psychic abilities 1-5 years
Code 17: Employment
In a city of 400 million, most are unemployed. Many of the routine jobs humans would once have ﬁ lled have been either 
automated or can be accomplished far more cheaply and ef ﬁ ciently by robots. As a consequence, the chances of having a 
meaningful job in Mega-City One are slim. Unemployment, and how to handle it, is taught as part of the school curriculum in a 
bid to equip people for the tedious reality of having nothing to do.
Given this situation, Code 17 relates to the labyrinthine employment laws of the city. Moonlighting – holding down two jobs at 
once – for example, denies someone else a job and so is illegal. Employing robots to carry out tasks designated for humans 
does similar. Likewise, some tasks are assigned speciﬁ cally to robots because they are too complex or hazardous for humans 
to undertake – despite the fact that many humans simply do not care, as long as they can work.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Employing citizens without a licence 1-15 years
2 Breach of health and safety regulations Cr. 1,000 or up to 2 years
3 Moonlighting 5 years per job
4 Employing robots in a human-speci ﬁ c task 5-8 years
5 Employing humans in a robot-speci ﬁ c task 5-8 years

===PAGE 85===
 I Am The Law!
84
Code 18: Fraud & Forgery
Fraud and forgery are reﬁ ned arts in Mega-City One, even given the advanced antifraud measures built into ofﬁ cial documents, permits 
and so on. Practised forgers and counterfeiters are masters of their craft, capable of replicating most documents given enough time, 
resources and money, to a standard that will fool most detection devices. As most activities in Mega-City One require a permit or a 
license, fraud and forgery are still extensive crimes; citizens are always willing to take a risk to be able to pursue what they want to.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Defrauding the Justice Department 20 years-Life
2 Corporate fraud or embezzling 10-30 years
3 Trading in fraudulent goods 5-20 years
4 Counterfeiting or forgery of legal documents 8-15 years
5 Forgery 5-12 years
6 Possession of forging equipment 3-10 years
7 Knowingly trading or possessing forged or counterfeit items 2-8 years
8 Misleading description of goods or services 2-5 years
Code 19: Impersonation & Deception
Given the status and power of the Judges it is little surprise that some citizens feel the need to impersonate them – either to commit 
a crime and (hopefully) get away with it or simply to experience the sheer thrill of striding around Mega-City One, clad in that iconic 
uniform and helmet and to see the looks of fear, admiration and respect on the faces of ordinary civilians as a Judge hoves into 
view. Naturally enough, impersonating a Judge – jimping – is a serious offence, even if the purpose is simply to attend an innocent 
fancy dress party. Yet impersonation and deception is not conﬁ ned to jimping. With face changing technology available with relative 
ease, the temptation is there to have one’s facial features modiﬁ ed to resemble those of a TV, vid or music star. This is, of course, 
illegal; but it does not stop unscrupulous, unlicensed (and thus illicit) face change clinics from offering this special service to those 
who can a) afford it b) get a real kick from looking like current vid star Britnee Woodtarn and c) want to run the risk of a year in the 
cubes. For the fame-hungry (and Mega-City One has lots of famished individuals), the risk is worth it. 
Section Offence Sentence
1 Jimping (impersonation of a Judge) with intent to commit crime 10-20 years
2 Jimping for other reasons 5-10 years
3 Unauthorised use of an image of a Judge for commercial reasons 1-5 years
4 Unauthorised impersonation of a celebrity or public ﬁ gure 3 months-1 year
5 Impersonation of a known criminal 6 months-2 years
6 Obtaining goods or services through deception 2-5 years
Code 20: Contraband
Exotic (and hence illegal, highly controlled or highly taxed) substances arrive in Mega-City One from many sources: other Mega Cities, the Cursed 
Earth and off-world. With so many of these tempting goodies banned outright, organised crime can make literal and metaphorical killings by 
supplying contraband merchandise at outrageous prices. Umpty Bagging – the sale of Uncle Ump’s extraordinary candy – is a case in point. 
Psychologically addictive, the recipe was shipped off-world with its creator but that did not stop pirates from capturing Ump’s lone spaceship and 
extorting the secret recipe from him. This counterfeit candy is now smuggled back into Mega-City One by the organised crime gangs to satisfy the 
needs of Umpty cravers desperate for their next ﬁ x. Similar is true for many other substances deemed too bad for public health – such as sugar, 
caffeine and other innocuous pleasures that were once considered harmless in the simpler days of the 20
th and early 21st Centuries.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Possession or manufacture of illegal substance with intent to trade 5-30 years
2 Possession of illegal substance with intent to use 1-10 years + compulsory detox
3 Smuggling 8-20 years
4 Illegal or unlicensed ﬁ rearm 6 months-3 years
5 Umpty bagging 5-30 years
6 Possession or trade of restricted publications 1-8 years

===PAGE 86===
 I Am The Law!
85
Code 21: Genetic Purity
The war that led to the Cursed Earth created extensive and hideous mutations in many Americans. It also created fear, suspicion 
and loathing, rather than pity, amongst those not af ﬂ icted. Legislation early in Mega-City One’s history led to the Mutant Act 
banning mutants from the Mega-City One environs, condemning them to life in the Cursed Earth. The act enforced regulations 
surrounding genetic purity, the reasoning being that all kinds of devastating diseases might infect non-mutants, giving rise to  
uncontrollable and exotic plagues that would destroy the remaining populace. Thus, any sign of mutation in the gene pool 
was considered illegal, with sufferers being automatically exiled to the Cursed Earth. Similarly, the law applied to genetic 
manipulation and testing that might give rise to further mutation, such as cloning (even though the Justice Department has, 
itself, used cloning successfully to create Judge Dredd). Code 21 offences have recently been repealed, but are included here 
for completeness.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Mutant DNA Cursed Earth Exile
2 Concealing/harbouring a mutant 1-5 years or Cursed Earth Exile


===PAGE 87===
 I Am The Law!
86
Code 22: Pollution
Mega-City One operates a sophisticated weather control system, developed in the wake of the great Climate Change Meltdown 
scare of the early 21st Century. However, even with the ability to programme weather down to a street-by-street level, pollution 
is still a major concern and is therefore clamped-down with the kind of zeal that still recalls the environmental doom-mongers 
of the Climate Change era. Any form of harmful pollution, be it smoking the odd cigarette outdoors or excessive noise, is an 
offence punishable by a spell in the iso-cubes – and Judges are provided with handheld pollution meters to record any offending 
outputs be they emissions or decibels.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Interfering with operation of Weather control 20-30 years
2 Creating atmospheric pollution Cr. 5,000 ﬁ ne or up to 2 years
3 Noise pollution Cr. 2,000 ﬁ ne or up to 2 years
Code 23: Perverting the Course of Justice
Any action to prevent the law from working as it should, or the agents of the Justice Department doing their job, carries an 
iso-cube sentence. Most citizens know better than to get in the way of a Judge but there are still those who see the Judges 
as oppressors and are willing to run the risk of imprisonment if it means taking a stand, however small, against the totalitari an 
justice regime.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Resisting Arrest 5-8 years
2 Escaping from Justice Department custody or imprisonment 10-20 years
3 Perp running (aiding an escape out of Mega-City One) 5-30 years
4 Perverting the course of Justice 15 years-Life
5 Aiding and abetting a known criminal 3-10 years
6 Obstructing a Judge in his duty 5-15 years
Code 24: Secondary Offences
Secondary offences usually accompany the offences under the sections of the primary codes and have sentences that add onto 
the sentence for the primary crime – or carry sentences of their own.
Section Offence Sentence
1 Attempt to commit any category of crime +25%-50% of the offence’s sentence
2 Conspiracy to commit any category crime +25%-50% of the offence’s sentence
3 Withholding information about any crime 2-15 years
4 Actual or attempted bribery of a Judge 10 years
5 Bribery of a citizen 2-10 years
6 Withholding evidence 10-15 years
7 Fabricating evidence 10-15 years
8 Perjury, lying to a Judge or malicious accusation 3 months-5 years
9 Persistent offender +25% of the offence’s sentence
10 Overdue library slug Cr. 100 per slug, per day

===PAGE 88===
 I Am The Law!
87
Exceptions to Sentencing
Despite the impression that all Judges are iso-cube happy, 
the law allows for discretion based on circumstances. A 
Judge is never compelled to impose a custodial sentence 
where there are grounds or mitigating circumstances for 
leniency. Some examples of where a Judge can impose a 
different form of sentence are:
• Criminal Activity is the Result of Insanity: 
Indeﬁ nite psycho-cube observation until mental state is 
determined.
• Homicidal or Compulsive Violent 
Behaviour, Psychotic or Sociopathic 
Tendencies: Indeﬁ nite psycho-cube incarceration 
with occasional behavioural modifying brain surgery.
• Clear Evidence of Future Shock: Medical 
treatment in a psycho-cube until medical specialists 
deem the instance of futsie to have abated.
• Obsessive/Compulsive Non-Violent 
Criminal Behaviour (Kleptomania, 
Spontaneous Confession, ‘Petty Crime’ 
Addiction): Iso-cube incarceration. A citizen 
completely unable to behave and conform will be 
sentenced to a compulsory frontal lobotomy.
• Crimes Resulting From a Frustration 
at Being Unable to Work for a Living or 
as a Result of Losing a Treasured Job: 
Hard Labour community service for a period of time, 
depending on the nature of the crime. Hard labour of this 
kind involves community rebuilding schemes, production-
line work and so forth. Often, this kind of sentence is 
welcomed with gratitude by those who want to work.
Back-Up
Judges are trained to be able to handle the majority of incidents 
either singly or in Patrol groups; but, such is the nature of 
Mega-City One, it is sometimes necessary for Judges to call 
for reinforcements or specialised back-up units.
Calling for back-up is handled via the Sector House, which 
assesses and co-ordinates back-up resources. If the 
circumstances warrant it, back-up is usually automatic and 
consists, in the ﬁ rst instance, of a group of 1d6+1 additional 
Street Judges who arrive on the scene within 2d6+3 minutes. 
The circumstances where a Judge will be automatically be 
granted back-up response are as follows:
• Judge is alone and severely outnumbered
• Judge is injured/incapacitated
• Other Judges in the squad have been seriously injured/
incapacitate or killed
• The situation is clearly so severe that specialist units 
are essential
If none of the above apply but a Judge still requires back-
up he will need to succeed in an In ﬂ uence 8+ roll when 
contacting control. The Referee may apply a negative DM 
to the roll if the situation is one where the Judge should, 
in most circumstances, be able to handle the incident. For 
example, a lone Judge pursuing a group of half a dozen juve 
scrawlers who calls for back-up is likely to receive short-
shrift from Sector House control, represented in a –4 DM to 
his Inﬂ uence roll.
Some circumstances require specialist units to aid in the 
case – medical aid, Tek Judges or Psi Judges for example. 
Summoning appropriate aid is still handled via the Sector 
House and, in most cases, will be automatically granted once 
the Judge has described the circumstances. If the Referee 
believes that the circumstances are less than clear or that 
the Judge needs to justify the request, then an Inﬂ uence roll 
of 8+ (with a positive or negative DM of between 2 and 4, 
depending on the circumstances) may be called for.
Clean-Up Squad
The ones who mop-up the mess, Clean-Up squads arrive 
in specially equipped Pat Wagons to repair, clean, cleanse 
and generally attempt to restore normality to a scene after 
Judges have been involved in some perp-related incident. 
Unsurprisingly, the Clean-Up squads are amongst the most 
overworked in the Justice Department.
Fire Squad
Fire Squads are part of the Civil Administration but they 
work closely with the Justice Department to extinguish ﬁ res 
with their advanced ﬁ re-ﬁ ghting vehicles and equipment, 
including Hover Water-cannon and Mobile Foam-carriers.

===PAGE 89===
 I Am The Law!
88
Heavy Weapons Squad
When a situation is truly out of hand and only the largest 
ﬁ repower will sufﬁ ce, the Heavy-Weapons squads provide 
it. These units are called in to deal with sieges, Block Wars 
and other major disturbances and usually consist of troops 
of Judges in heavily armoured H-Wagons, ﬁ tted with various 
large laser and ballistic weapons, missiles and other high-
end, high-impact ordnance.
 Holocaust Squad
The most extreme and dedicated of the Justice Department, 
Holocaust Squads are essentially a forlorn hope squad 
empowered to deal with the largest of disasters. Such 
occasions are rare but in the wake of the Apocalypse War 
their use gained frequency. Holocaust Squad members are 
carefully screened to ensure that they know and accept the 
risks associated with their role.
 Meat Wagon
For fatalities, a Meat Wagon transports the corpses to the 
morgue and from there onto Resyk, the Mega-City One body 
recycling plant. The Meat Wagon carries a Robodoc unit for 
in-situ autopsies and automated coroner reporting for those 
cases where the cause of death needs detailed (and rapid) 
analysis.
 Med Squad
A standard Justice Department Med Squad consists of two 
drivers, three Med Judges and a Robodoc unit, in a modiﬁ ed 
H-Wagon. The Med Squad is equipped to treat most types 
of injury in-situ and can also transport the injured to hospital 
units. If the injured party is a perp, then the Sector House’s 
own secure medbay will be used.
 Riot Squad
The Justice Department’s crack mass-control unit, Riot 
Squads handle Mega-City One’s demonstrations and 
protest marches, dealing with trouble speedily and easily by 
both forming a stalwart line of heavily armoured Judges that 
are quite prepared to use maximum force to maintain order 
and by dousing an area with fast-setting Riot Foam, thus 
rendering troublemakers incapable of disturbance.
 Tek Squad
Tek Squads deal with forensics and other technical 
evidence. Tek Squads use a variety of advanced devices 
to sift evidence and run a whole battery of tests over crime 
scenes – often remaining in situ for days or weeks after a 
Judge has handled a crime so that a conviction can be fully 
supported if a Judge lacks crucial evidence.
Mega 
Rackets
Organised crime is big business in Mega-City One. The old 
mainstays of such activities – well-primed gangs and the 
Maﬁ a – are still at work in the 22
nd Century, despite many 
attempts to wipe out organised criminal dealings.
The core areas of organised racketeering are outlined below. 
 Blitzing
Blitzers specialise in contract killing – either contracts on 
people someone else wants to hit or on people who want to 
be killed themselves. For many citizens of Mega-City One, life 
has nothing to offer and, lacking the will to commit suicide, 
they are prepared to pay a Blitzer to carry out the hit, knowing 
that the end will be swift. Days, weeks or months can go by 
before the Blitzer strikes and the contractor may even think 
that their contract has been forgotten.
Once a Blitzer accepts a contract, it is irreversible. Naturally 
the entire process is illegal and those who contract Blitzers 
to end their own lives are guilty of complicity. Again, Dredd 
stamped-out several Blitzer operations but they still work in 
Mega-City One – a city that tends to offer little hope for its 
citizens.
 Body Sharking
With the ability to place humans in suspended animation has 
come the practice of body sharking. Unscrupulous groups 
buy into suspended animation technology and offer loans 
secured against the life of a person who agrees to go into 
sus-an. If the borrower fails to pay-off the loan (which carries 
an extortionate interest rate), then the body held in sus-an 
is either terminated or sold to those who engage in live body 
experimentation. Naturally such a high price for defaulting 
on a loan ensures that the borrower pays the body sharkers, 
even at the crippling interest rates being charged. Most body 
sharkers prefer the money to having to kill their collateral 
and so are prepared to go to extreme lengths to ensure 
payments are made.
Most infamous of the body sharking rackets was operated 
by the Ratner gang, which was squashed by Judge Dredd. 
However, many others operate across Mega-City One, 
feeding on the desperation of the city’s citizens.
Every aspect of body sharking is illegal: the holding of bodies 
for the purpose and the extortion that goes with it. But even 
the victims of the practice – those who need the money and 

===PAGE 90===
 I Am The Law!
89
those who are willing to place themselves in sus-an to get 
it – are guilty of complicity. Without people wanting to go to 
these lengths, the racket would simply not exist.
 Chump Dumping
Another well-funded racket, Chump Dumping is the practice 
of taking money from the easily duped (usually aliens 
seeking a new life in Mega-City One, lured by false stories 
of how they can subjugate humans, be worshipped as gods 
or simply enjoy a fabulous lifestyle), arranging transport to 
another world but dumping the cargo into vacuum before the 
destination is reached.
The racket requires a legitimate front – usually as a deep 
space haulage contractor or provider of passenger services 
– and the ability to hide all trace of the kind of cargo it carries. 
Thus, Chump Dumpers are often Perp Runners too or have 
the means to successfully falsify ship and docking records 
so that their callous acts of murder remain undiscovered.
 Numbers Rackets
Not a form of gambling but the illegal trading in the core 
security and access codes for Mega-City One computers, 
allowing the owner to hack into the system for whatever ends 
he has in mind. Criminal gangs ﬁ nd the numbers rackets 
especially attractive because, if they lack the skills and 
resources to do the hacking, the codes can be sold for large 
sums to those who desperately want them. Obtaining the 
codes is, in itself, a hazardous task but there is no shortage 
of hackers who are willing to try; and no shortage of potential 
buyers.
 Perp Running
Escaping from a Justice Department iso-cube or kook-
cube is dif ﬁ cult enough but some do achieve it. Other 
perps, in danger of being caught by the Judges, are equally 
desperate. Enter the Perp Runners; gangs of mercenaries 
who will accept payment from criminals – the wanted and 
the escapees – to transport them off-world and beyond the 
clutches of justice.
Perp Running gangs tend to be wealthy and well-funded: a 
space ship is needed, plus the expensive cover necessary 
to provide a front for their activities. But that does not make 
them scrupulous; these are self-serving mobs who are not 
striking a blow for freedom but callous mercenaries who 
see a way of making money out of those ﬂ eeing from the 
justice system. Perp Runners, such as the mob headed by 
Slik Ike Kolorado, have been known to take perps to planets 
where the criminal element has gone haywire or worlds 
where criminals can be easily rounded-up and put to use 
as slaves. The Perp Runners care little: once paid and got 
the perp off-world, they consider their duty ful ﬁ lled. Some 
Perp Runners even dump their perps in the racket known as 
Chump Dumping (see above).
 Psyking
Any psion uncovered in Mega-City One has to be registered 
and, at the point of registration, it is determined what powers 
they are licensed to use. Unfortunately this does not prevent 
the crime organisations from using psions to augment their 
extortion rackets. Psyking is the practice whereby a criminal 
fraternity employs a psion to target those who refuse to 
pay protection money (or involve themselves in criminal 
enterprise) and use their psionic powers to intimidate, punish 
or even kill the target. As the use of psionic powers can be 
very difﬁ cult to detect, psyking can be a very effective racket 
and many unsolved murders and maimings have been the 
result of psyking episodes.
Of course, the criminal organisations that run psykers are 
aware that their pet psions might turn their powers against 
them, and take precautions against such treachery; and, if a 
psyker attempts to steal from the Mob, he can be assured a 
nasty demise as a reward. Despite efforts to end the psyking 
racket, it still goes on, with the Maﬁ a keen to ﬁ nd and exploit 
young, unregistered psykers who can be recruited into the 
organised criminal fraternities.
 Umpty Bagging
When poor old Uncle Ump invented Umpty Candy, he 
created the most fabulous taste ever devised. His candy 
tasted so great that even the smallest amount would induce 
constant cravings and hallucinatory withdrawal symptoms 
if the craving was not met. The Justice Department, faced 
with an epidemic of people suffering from Umpty withdrawal, 
knew that Uncle Ump could not be charged with a crime but 
could not be allowed to remain free. Dredd had Uncle Ump 
placed in an exile spaceship and sent into deep space so 
that he had no chance of remaining on Earth and being the 
target of the unscrupulous. The story was that Uncle Ump 
had died in Judge custody...
But this plan went badly awry – not least for Uncle Ump. The 
Jong brothers – Chump Dumpers and occasional pirates – 
came across Uncle Ump’s exile ship by chance and realised 
what they had found. Ump was forced to reveal his recipe 
for Umpty Candy and so the Jongs ﬂ ooded Mega-City One 
with a highly passable version of the stuff that satis ﬁ ed the 
cravings of deprived citizens. Dredd naturally brought the 
Jong gang to justice and effectively halted Umpty Bagging; 
but, being greedy, the Jongs have sold-on some of their 
knowledge to others who, now and again, attempt to get 
counterfeit Umpty Candy onto the streets.

===PAGE 91===
 I Am The Law!
90
The racket is mostly dead but every now and again someone 
attempts the formula, now in a highly bastardised version 
as it has been passed through countless hands since Uncle 
Ump gave it up under Jong torture. Judges may still come 
across small band of Umpty Baggers who feel they can make 
money from the most wonderful taste ever devised.
As for poor-old Uncle Ump? He got Chump Dumped...
 Stookie Glanding
The adifax gland of the alien Stookies retards and reverses 
aging. In 2059 this discovery led to the production of adifax-
based anagathics and, in 2060, the outlawing of the same 
when it became apparent the peaceful Stookies were being 
slaughtered wholesale to satisfy the needs of an aging 
population.
Stookie glanders kidnap, breed and slaughter Stookies 
to obtain the adifax gland, which is then used to produce 
anagathic drugs that are sold on the black market. As 
Stookies are intelligent, peaceful and meek, this repellent 
crime has led almost to their extermination. Stookie farms 
within the city are practically non-existent in present-day 
Mega-City One but farms exist in the Cursed Earth, well 
hidden from the Judges and protected by wealthy individuals 
within the city who rely heavily on the glanders’ output.
Although considerable effort has been made to stamp-
out Stookie glanding, the placid nature of the Stookies 
themselves makes them a constant target for glanders who 
attempt to plunder the Stookie home world for breeding 
pairs.


===PAGE 92===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 93===
 Equipment
92
Judge 
 Equipment
Every Judge carries a standard set of equipment on his 
person and also on his Lawmaster. Different specialisations 
have different equipment sets, obviously and these are 
treated in their own sections. Every Judge, however, gains 
the following items referenced further in this chapter:
Personal Items
Personal items are worn and carried on the person in 
the various glove pockets, belt and boot pouches of a 
Judge’s uniform. All this equipment is available from the 
Quartermaster’s Stores at the Sector House and can be 
replenished for every shift.
 Armour
The distinctive shoulder, elbow and knee pads of the 
uniform, along with a Judge’s badge, are advanced armour 
components, designed to act as symbols of of ﬁ ce but also 
to provide much needed protection against gun shots, las-
gun beams, knives, stones, clubs and the panoply of other 
weapons that will be used against a Judge on a daily basis. 
Made from a mixture of plasteen and foamed kevlar, the 
armour components are light, do not inhibit movement and 
offer optimum protection without burdening the Judge.
Coupled with the Bodysuit uniform, a Judge wears the 
equivalent of 6-point armour. 
 Birdy
The Birdy lie detector is a hand-held sensor array that 
accurately detects lies and mistruths. It analyses voice, 
body heat, perspiration emissions and other physical signals 
unconsciously and automatically given out whenever a 
person is lying. Any person attempting to lie without using 
the Deception skill is detected by the Birdy automatically 
(essentially a roll of 2+ on 2d6). If a person uses Deception 
whilst a Judge has a Birdy trained on them they must 
succeed in making a Formidable (–6) Deception roll to 
beat the Birdy’s sensitive and highly effective lie detection 
circuitry. The Birdy has an effective radius of 2 metres. Using 
it to detect a lie requires a Signiﬁ cant Action.
 Bleepers (x4)
Using a molecular adhesive, bleepers are micro transmitters 
that emit a continuous signal capable of being tracked by 
any Justice department vehicle or surveillance measure 
(such as a Spy-in-the-Sky surveillance camera). A bleeper 
has an effective range of 10 kilometres. Fitting a bleeper to a 
suspect or a suspect’s vehicle is a Minor Action.
Bodysuit  Uniform
The blue-black bodysuit uniform of a Judge is designed to 
be distinctive, imposing and functional. Its plasteen-kevlar 
fabric offers not only excellent protection from assaults but 
contains specially designed porous layers to keep the wearer 
correctly insulated at all times. Like the armour components, 
the bodysuit contributes to the 6 points of armour all Judges 
have against projectile, melee and energy weapon attacks.
 Boots
The calf-length boots a Judge wears are more than just 
imposing footwear. The boot contains an integral Lawgiver 
holster (allowing for the Lawgiver to be easily drawn whilst 
riding a Lawmaster), a concealed bootknife and pockets for 
small items. The toecaps are reinforced, giving the boots the 
impression of being larger than they actually are. Specially 
designed innersoles help to elevate the Judge and keep the 
feet comfortable even after many hours of pounding a beat 
or kicking lawbreaker gluteus maximus.
 Bootknife
Held in a concealed sheath in the boot, the bootknife is 
balanced for personal defence and throwing and functions 
as a standard dagger as per page 98 of the Traveller Core 
Rulebook.
 Breathalyser
The breathalyser instantly evaluates the condition of a 
suspect’s breath, displaying the consumption of any of the 
following substances made in the past twenty four hours: 
alcohol, Class A, B or C drugs, Synthi-Caff and Umpty 
Candy. 
Using the breathalyser takes a Signi ﬁ cant Action and the 
device has an effective radius of 2 metres.
 Chronometer
Built into the wrist section of the glove, the chronometer 
displays local time, date and ambient temperature. It is self-
adjusting to different time zones.
 Handcuffs (x2)
Plastisteel restraints that lock around a perp’s wrists and 
tighten if the wearer attempts any excessive wrist movement, 
Justice Department handcuffs can only be released using 
the special security codes at a Sector House. The restraints 
are designed to be used by a Judge one-handed. Rolling 
Dex+Athletics (co-ordination) 8+ allows the Judge to cuff a 
suspect in a single, ﬂ uid movement, using a Minor Action, if 
he has the cuffs ready. If the Judge is taking his time, then a 
perp can be securely cuffed in a Signiﬁ cant Action. The cuffs 
are exceedingly strong: 20 points of damage needs to be 

===PAGE 94===
 Equipment
93
applied in a single burst to cut through or break the linkage 
between the cuffs and 30 points need to be applied to 
remove the cuffs from around the wrists. Each cuff contains 
a standard Bleeper (see above) as an integral tracking 
feature.
Trying to wriggle free of the cuffs requires a successful 
Athletics (co-ordination) roll against 15+. Each failed attempt 
to break free causes the cuffs to tighten, increasing the target 
for the Athletics roll by +1. If the wearer makes three or more 
attempts to break free unsuccessfully, he sustains 1 point of 
damage, applied to his Dex, as the cuffs bite into his wrists, 
squeeze the nerves and threaten to crack the bones.
 Helmet (Mk II)
The distinctive helmet of a Judge is, perhaps, the de ﬁ ning 
element of his presence. A sophisticated, armoured, piece of 
headgear, it presents the implacable face of Justice to Mega-
City One’s citizens, lends weight to the public’s perception of 
the Judge and offers vital communications, life-support and 
protective elements.
The helmet is made from bonded Kevlar and plastisteel 
giving it a full 6 points of armour capability against projectiles, 
melee weapons and las-gun beams. The antiglare visor 
protects the eyes from strong sunlight and violent bursts 
of light, meaning that Judges reduce any DMs imposed 
by bright light by half. The visor includes infra-red imaging, 
meaning that he suffers no DMs due to darkness ( Traveller 
Core Rulebook, page 63). The forehead-mounted respirator 
can also be pulled down to cover the mouth and chin and 
activates the helmet’s integral air supply. In this mode, a 
Judge is supplied with fresh oxygen for up to 20 minutes 
(120 rounds). If caught unawares, activating the respirator is 
a Signiﬁ cant Action.
The helmet includes anti-shock earphones, which prevent 
against sonic attacks or very loud reports; all DMs associated 
with such attacks are reduced by half. And naturally enough, 
the helmet includes a full communications array, keeping 
the Judge in touch with Sector House control and fellow 
Judges, with an effective operating range of 20 kilometres. 
An auxiliary, drop-down microphone extends this range 
to 40 kilometres but as the microphone can interfere with 
general wear, it acts as a long-range back up. The comms 
array slaves to the Lawmaster’s own communications 
package allowing the Judge to communicate with the bike 
and use the Lawmaster’s more powerful communications 
tools remotely.
 Lawgiver (Mk II)
As iconic as the helmet, the Mk II Lawgiver is the standard 
sidearm for all Judges. This is no mere pistol; the Lawgiver is 
a complete weapons system that incorporates the following 
unique features:
• Integral palm-sensors: These ensure that 
only a Judge keyed to that weapon can use it. If an 
unauthorised palm print is detected by the Lawgiver’s 
computer, the gun self-destructs, inﬂ icting 3d6 damage 
to the person holding it.
• Variable ammunition magazine:  A Lawgiver 
ﬁ res six separate kinds of ammunition (see below) 
which can be selected manually, via a side-mounted dial 
or vocally, using standard voice commands. Switching 
between ammunition types is a Minor Action.
• Integral stun-shot pulse system: The weapon 
emits an electronically-generated subsonic pulse 
designed to stun and disorient targets rather than 
deliver physical injury. This works as a TL10 Stunner, 
described on page 100 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
• Clip-on Gas grenade adaptor:  Used to ﬁ  re 
stumm grenades to the optimum distance.
• Through-barrel targeting computer:  A 
sensor array located at the rear of the pistol, behind the 
grip, provides an accurate targeting mechanism for the 
Judge, offering a precise image of where a standard 
execution round will strike when the Lawgiver is ﬁ red. 
The targeting system is useful when a Judge has the 
time to precisely aim his shot – but most of the time 
he relies on his Lawgiver training to deliver the snap-
response accuracy that is so often needed when dealing 
with lawbreakers and other assailants. If a Judge is 
actively Aiming (Traveller Core Rulebook, page 61) he 
gains a +2 DM for each Minor Action he spends aiming, 
up to a maximum of +6 (3 Minor Actions).
The Lawgiver’s specialised nature and sophisticated 
weaponry mechanisms mean that specialised training is 
required in its use. The skill covering the gun is Gun Combat 
(Lawgiver); any non-Judge who picks-up a Lawgiver (and 
who, miraculously, manages to bypass its self-destruct 
routine), suffers the standard –3 DM for unskilled usage.
Lawgiver  Ammunition 
Magazines (x4)
The Lawgiver ﬁ  res six separate types of ammunition, as 
selected by the Judge. The magazines holds 30 Standard 
Execution rounds – the default ammunition type used by 
the Lawgiver – but a computer-controlled calibration system 
in the front of the magazine adjusts each SE round to ﬁ t 
the selected pro ﬁ le from the ﬁ ve remaining alternatives: 
Armour-Piercing (AP), Heat Seeking (HS or Hot Shot), 
High-Explosive (HE), Incendiary (IC) or Ricochet (RC). 
Issuing a voice command, using either the full name of the 
round or the initials given in parentheses, instructs the gun 

===PAGE 95===
978 6352 
Helmet MKII
978 1561 
Chronometer
Bootknife
Helmet
978 7241 
Armour
Bodysuit Uniform
Chronometer
Bootknife
Boots

===PAGE 96===
Lawgiver Ammo x4
Handcuffs
Bleepers x4
Birdy
Breathalyser
Medipack
Override Card
Pollution Meter
Stumm Gas Rounds x2
978 4291
Handcuffs x2
Birdy
978 0916
Override Card
978 9247
Pollution Meter
978 7104


===PAGE 97===
 Equipment
to calibrate and load the appropriate ammunition type: the 
Lawgiver always provides a verbal conﬁ rmation of the round 
selected to ensure the right choice has been made.
 Armour-Piercing (AP)
A calibrated SE round forms the basis of the Armour Piercing 
round. An AP round is capable of penetrating up to 6cm of 
plastisteel armour. In game terms, an AP round ignores the ﬁ rst 
12 points of armour it encounters. 
AP rounds cannot be Rapid Fired.
 Heat Seeking (HS)
An SE round is capped with a miniature heat-seeking 
warhead that locks onto a human heat signature as identiﬁ ed 
by the Lawgiver’s targeting system and guides itself to the 
target. The warhead arms itself at ranges above 15 metres, 
functioning as an SE round at ranges below 15 metres. HS 
rounds have an inbuilt safety cut-out to prevent them turning 
about-face and hitting the Judge. If there is no eligible target 
identiﬁ ed by the targeting mechanism, then the round will 
guide itself to the nearest target within a 180° arc on a roll 
of 6+ on 2d6.
HS rounds cannot be Rapid Fired.
 High-Explosive (HE)
High Explosive rounds explode on impact, causing 
catastrophic damage to their targets. The HE round has a 
burst radius of 3 metres, applying damage to everything 
within its radius of effect.
HE rounds cannot be Rapid Fired.
 Incendiary (IC)
Filled with a highly unstable chemical compound, IC rounds 
shatter on impact and ignite any ﬂ ammable materials they 
contact, spreading ﬁ re over a 2 metres radius. The IC round 
delivers 2d6 ﬁ re damage in addition to its standard damage 
and burns for 1d6 rounds, inﬂ icting a further 1d6 damage per 
round until it is extinguished.
IC rounds cannot be Rapid Fired.
 Rapid Fire
Some ammunition types, such as SE, are rapid- ﬁ re rounds. 
The Judge can voice-command his Lawgiver to act in Rapid 
Fire mode when these types of ammunition are selected. 
Rapid Fire allows the Lawgiver to ﬁ re in Burst Mode, as 
described under the section on Automatic Weapons on page 
62 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
 Ricochet (RC)
An SE round calibrated and ﬁ tted with a rubber tip, the 
Ricochet round is used to best effect in enclosed spaces or 
where there is the capability to rebound the shot from a wall 
or ceiling to hit a concealed target. Its lower damage also 
makes it useful as a stun round, for use when the shot pulse 
function of the Lawgiver is out of range.
Using RC rounds is handled slightly differently to a 
straightforward combat sequence. First, the Judge ﬁ res the 
RC round at, or into, the area to be used for the ricochet. This 
is treated as an Easy skill (+2 DM) as the targeting system 
in the Lawgiver assists the positioning of the shot in relation 
to the targeted perp. If the shot is successful, the Judge then 
rolls 1d6. If the result of this roll is equal to or less than , his 
Gun Combat (Lawgiver) skill, then the RC round ricochets 
accurately and satisfyingly and hits its target with the target 
unable to take evasive action. If the 1d6 roll is higher than 
the Judge’s Lawgiver skill, the target is allowed either a Dex 
10+ or Athletics (co-ordination) 8+ roll to try to get out of 
the way of the ricocheting round. If he fails, he is hit. If he 
succeeds, the bullet misses.
If a Judge is ﬁ ring into an enclosed area, such as the cab of a 
car, then the Referee can increase the Judge’s Gun Combat 
(Lawgiver) skill by up to +3, for the purposes of determining 
if the RC round hits and denies the target the opportunity to 
dodge the bouncing bullet owing to restricted movement, if 
applicable.
RC rounds can be Rapid Fired.
 Standard Execution (SE)
The standard round for the Lawgiver, this is solid ammunition 
that contains the unstable element Argon 88b which acts 
as the propellant. SE rounds are all-purpose rounds that, 
through the advanced computer systems of the Lawgiver, can 
be calibrated and customised into the different ammunition 
types described above.
SE rounds can be Rapid Fired.
96

===PAGE 98===
Lawgiver 
MKII
Lawgiver Silencer


===PAGE 99===
 Equipment
98
Lawgiver  Ammunition Table
Ammo 
Type Range
Rapid 
Fire Damage Recoil Mass Magazine*
Weight (Lawgiver, 
fully loaded) Notes
AP Ranged 
(Pistol)
No 4d6 1 0 3 1.5kg Ignore the ﬁ rst 12 
points of Armour
HE Ranged 
(Pistol)
No 5d6 2 0 3
HS Ranged 
(Pistol)
No 4d6–3 0 0 3
IC Ranged 
(Pistol)
No 3d6 0 0 3 +2d6 Fire 
damage. Burns 
for 1d6 rounds, 
with 1d6 ﬁ re 
damage per 
round.
RC Ranged 
(Pistol)
4 2d6 0 0 3
SE Ranged 
(Pistol)
4 4d6 0 0 30
*The Lawgiver magazine holds 30 SE rounds. SE rounds 
are calibrated according to ammunition type, with the 
maximum number of SE rounds that can be calibrated to a 
different type noted in the Magazine column. Each shot ﬁ red 
decreases the magazine by 1.
Lawgiver  Silencer
A clip on attachment to the muzzle of the Lawgiver, the 
silencer deadens almost all sound and ﬂ ash when the gun is 
ﬁ red. Fitting the silencer is a Signiﬁ cant Action and its mufﬂ ed 
report is inaudible at a range greater than 3 metres. The 
Lawgiver will also automatically mute its speaker system, so 
round selection is not repeated to the Judge. A Lawgiver 
cannot be Rapid Fired when a silencer is ﬁ tted and neither 
can it ﬁ re stumm gas rounds.
 Medipak
All Judges carry a medipak within their utility belt. The 
medipak contains a basic diagnosis mediscanner, magnabind 
bandages, three hypos preloaded with painkillers, three 
hypos loaded with stumm gas antidote and ten anti-rad pills. 
The pack is good for two uses and provides a +1 DM to the 
Medic skill or allows a Judge without Medic to use the skill at 
a –1 DM instead of –3.
 Override Card
An electronic skeleton key. The override card is a wafer of 
plasteen encoded with a universal override command to 
open all electronic security systems for most Mega-City One 
businesses and residences. Using the card a Judge can 
open most locks on a roll of Int 6+, although some locks 
have a higher security rating that is ranked from between 1 
and 6 (standard locks have security 0). The security rating 
is applied as a DM to the 6+ roll, so a lock with security 
5 requires a roll of 11+ to open using the card. It takes a 
Signiﬁ cant Action to open a door.
 Pollution Meter
A small, handheld scanner carried in the utility belt, the 
pollution meter measures both radiation and airborne 
contaminants with a high degree of accuracy, allowing a Judge 
to survey the toxicity of an environment with a Signi ﬁ cant 
Action. To identify speci ﬁ c compounds or radiation levels 
takes two Signiﬁ cant Actions and the Judge must succeed in 
making an Int 6+ roll; Science skills (Chemistry, for example) 
apply a positive DM to the assessment.
 Stumm Gas Rounds (x2)
Stumm gas is typically used as an anti-riot and crowd control 
measure. Stumm gas causes nausea and discomfort when 
inhaled (throw End 11+ or be rendered incapacitated as though 
one characteristic has fallen to 0 for 1d6 minutes). The gas round 
has an area effect of 10 metres and the gas disperses in 1d6 
rounds. Stumm gas rounds can be thrown into an area or launched 
using the Lawgiver’s Gas Round attachment. If launched, a round 
can be placed accurately at a range of up to 50 metres.
Some citizens can display a violent, potentially lethal, allergic 
reaction to stumm gas. If, when making the Endurance roll 
to check for incapacitation, the dice result is a 2, the victim 
must make an immediate End 4+ roll. Failure means they 
are treated as though two physical characteristics have been 
reduced to 0 and undergoes painful spasms, vomiting and 
possibly a fatal seizure. The affected individual sustains a 
further 1d6–1 damage for each minute of the gas’s effect 
unless he receives a shot of stumm gas antidote (all Judges 
carry antidote in their medipack).

===PAGE 100===
 Equipment
99
Specialist Judge Equipment
In addition, specialist Judges gain certain equipment of their 
own:
Advanced  Medipack (Med 
Judge)
The medipacks carried by Med Judges are far superior to 
those issued to Street Judges. Each contains the equivalent 
uses of four standard Justice Department medipacks (see 
page 98), as well as a mediscanner connected directly to 
MAC’S medical databases. The use of the mediscanner 
allows a Med Judge to automatically diagnose any known 
disease or poison after one minute’s inspection of a subject, 
dead or alive. In addition, the mediscanner also allows 
a Med Judge to analyse any unknown disease or poison. 
Such analysis takes one hour with a subject and a Medic 8+ 
roll. Success yields the properties of the disease or poison, 
such as its incubation period, method of contagion, damage 
caused and so on.
 Micro Forensics Lab (Tek 
Judge)
The micro forensics lab carried by all Tek Judges is a 
hand-held device used to collect and store samples. Any 
substance of up to 10cm in length may be placed within and 
analysed with a successful Investigate or Physical Sciences 
(biology or chemistry) roll (8+ to 12+, depending on the rarity 
of the substance). This analysis informs the Judge within 
one minute of the substance’s properties and the potential 
danger it poses to humans. Up to three substance samples 
may be safely stored within the micro forensics lab, where 
they will be kept uncontaminated from the outside world 
until they are transported back to a Sector House for a more 
complex analysis.
 Scanalyser (Tek Judge)
Tek Judges all possess a modi ﬁ ed Mk II helmet which 
incorporates a scanalyser as an eye-piece. The scanalyser 
is connected to MAC’s technical databases and contains a 
selectable analysis ﬁ lter as well as a drop-down information 
display to provide the Tek Judge with all the information 
he needs when working on any technical project. The 
scanalyser grants a +2 DM to any Engineer or Science roll a 
Tek Judge makes, as he can readily call related information 
to its display. In addition, the scanalyser also functions as 
a micro forensics lab to analyse substances. While using 
the scanalyser in this way only takes 1 to 3 rounds, as 
opposed to the micro forensics lab’s minute, all skill rolls 
made to perform analysis functions are made at a –1 DM 
penalty as the scanalyser is not as ef ﬁ cient at collecting 
such information. As well as these two major functions, the 
scanalyser also has the bene ﬁ t of allowing the Tek Judge 
to almost instantly gain any information he requires on the 
technical speci ﬁ cations of any vehicle, robot, weapon or 
equipment known in Mega-City One.
 Lawmaster and Bike Equipment
The standard issue transportation for a Judge, the Lawmaster 
is as iconic as the helmet and Lawgiver. A common (and 
not always welcome, if you are a lawbreaker) sight on the 
streets, skedways, megways and Xpressways of Mega-City 
One, the Lawmaster is a high performance, high endurance, 
high technology vehicle and weapon system rolled into 
one. Every Judge is allocated a Lawmaster as part of his 
standard equipment and, naturally enough, the Academy of 
Law has taught him what he needs to know to get the best 
out of the bike.
Dimensions
Height 1,156mm
Width 950mm
Length 2,500mm
Wheelbase 1,956mm
Weight 150kg
Fuel Capacity 55 litres
Powerplant Notron V8, 4000cc, ASB Quad Carbs
Full Speed 570kph
Max Speed 950m per round
Acceleration 330m per round
Deceleration 400m per round
Cost MCr. 1.5
Statistics
Skill Drive (Lawmaster)
Agility +2
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour 12 (saddle, fuel tank)
Hull/Structure 2/2
Weapons 2 x Bike Cannon, Cyclops Laser
The Lawmaster’s Notron 4000cc V8 engine with ASB 
quad carburettors is the power behind the Lawmaster and 
generates enough energy to run virtually all the bike’s 
functions. The powerplant runs on Justice Department, 
special formula, non-explosive, minimal emissions, synthi-
diesel and a Judge can gain an entire shift’s patrol from a 
single tank. The fuel tank and engine are both protected by 
12mm (12 point armour protection) plastisteel plate.

===PAGE 101===
Lawmaster


===PAGE 102===
 Equipment
101
• Comms/0 – The communications software that slaves 
to the Judge’s helmet comms system, the Sector House 
and Justice Central. The comms package allows the 
Lawmaster computer to fully access MAC.
• Justice Library/0  – The library software provides the 
Judge with a constantly updated read-out of crimes in 
progress within his Sector, major crimes elsewhere in 
the city, alerts for back up by other Judges, crime status 
and arrest reports for cases other Judges in the Sector 
are handling and newsfeed bulletins on general Mega-
City One news. 
Cable Winch
Mounted under the rear fairing, just behind the wheel, is a 
Tikkra TT cable winch with 20 yards of line. Fully motorised, 
the cable is stressed for weights of over one ton, though the 
Lawmaster can realistically pull only half of this before losing 
stability.
Communications Array
The comms array provides audio and visual contact with 
both the Sector House and Justice HQ. The unit’s vid-screen 
transmits as well as receives video and is voice activated. It 
contains a hand-held comms unit, connected to the array 
with 2m of coiled cable. Fitted into the corner of the unit is the 
small red Emergency button: this is the Judge’s SOS alarm, 
which immediately summons other Judges by sending out 
a blanket alert signal to all other Lawmaster comms arrays 
within the Sector. Use of the Emergency button is a last 
resort: Judges are expected to be self-reliant and, if back 
up is needed, to communicate the request via Sector House 
control (so that Judges not engaged in tackling crime can be 
despatched, rather than disturbing all Judges in a Sector). 
The Emergency button is therefore rarely used, and when it 
is, it signals a dire need for additional assistance.
 Daystick
The daystick is a metre-long club made from reinforced 
plastisteel. Used in crowd control or simply when blunt trauma 
is preferable to a Standard Execution round, the daystick 
is sometimes nicknamed the ‘Two Second Lobotomy’. The 
daystick’s bulk means that most Street Judges leave the 
weapon in the Lawmaster’s stowage, bringing it out only 
when necessary – although it can be hooked onto the utility 
belt if a Judge needs to carry it as a deterrent or an active 
weapon.
The daystick functions as a Club ( Traveller Core Rulebook, 
page 98)
Firerock Tyres
The wide, plastisteel and rubber tyres are high performance, 
run-ﬂ at and bullet proof. Despite their width, they still 
The standard ﬁ xtures and ﬁ ttings of the Lawmaster are as 
follows:
Armoured Saddle
The saddle is ﬁ tted with 12mm plastisteel armour, which 
affords 12 points of armour protection to the Judge if targeted 
from the rear. The saddle itself is made from memory foam, 
which contours to the Judge’s frame and offers maximum 
comfort for the long hours spent on patrol.
Automatic Mode
The Lawmaster has a full automatic function which allows 
it to manoeuvre accurately, either according to a Judge’s 
communicated instructions or to co-ordinates programmed 
into its onboard nav-computer. Its weapon systems can be 
activated remotely but only via a Judge’s direct command.
Operating a Lawmaster in automatic mode requires the 
Judge to make a Drive (Lawmaster) roll at a –2 DM, although 
he gains a DM for his Remote Operations skill, if he has it.
 Bike Computer
The Synitron GK13 autopilot computer forms the heart of the 
Lawmaster and is responsible for keeping a Judge on his bike 
and active, even in the most adverse of conditions. In order 
to achieve this, the bike computer’s gyro logic units make the 
entire vehicle both light to control and yet very stable as they 
constantly make corrections to the bike’s speed and position 
on the road. The bike computer is sophisticated enough to 
control the Lawmaster without a Judge’s input altogether. 
Linked into the Likron GS 4T telecommunications unit, the 
bike computer is also capable of connecting its Judge with 
virtually any resource of the Justice Department quickly 
and easily, with the minimum of interaction from the Judge 
himself. The Likron GS 4T has a maximum range of well over 
260 kilometres. Just like the Lawgiver, the bike computer 
can accept verbal commands and relay information either 
verbally or on its high-resolution screen. The bike computer 
combines an automatic target acquisition system with ﬁ re 
control, allowing it to ﬁ re the Lawmaster’s weapons without 
intervention from the
 Judge. The computer is equipped with 
the following software:
• Automode/0 – Governs all automatic and remote 
operations.
• Navigation/1 – A full set of Mega-City One navigation 
charts that govern its navigation systems. The software 
gives a +1 DM to a Judge’s Mega-City One Geography 
skill or allows him to use Mega-City One Geography at 
0 (if he does not have the skill) when riding the bike.
• Fire Control/0 – The weapon system software allowing 
the Lawmaster to operate its weaponry via remote 
commands.

===PAGE 103===
 Equipment
102
offer excellent handling in all weather, and most terrain, 
conditions.
Lamps
Each Lawmaster has ﬁ ve standard headlamps and a single 
Nite-Eye ﬂ ood and infrared lamp. The standard headlamps 
are arranged in two banks on either side of the Nite-Eye: the 
array consists of two main lamps and then three back-up 
lamps, which are used in fog or heavy rain. The Nite-Eye’s 
intensity in ﬂ ood mode illuminates a 10 metre, 180-degree 
arc of darkness to daylight levels; in infrared mode, is used 
to spot heat traces, such as recent footprints (although such 
heat signatures tend to dissipate within 10 minutes).
 Scattergun
Holstered on the side of the fuel tank, this shotgun-like 
back-up weapon is pump-action and ﬁ res either standard 
12-gauge plastisteel shot, plasteen baton rounds or stumm 
gas rounds. The Scattergun can hold up to 12 rounds in its 
magazine and different rounds can be mixed in the same 
magazine or individually loaded into the breech. This weapon 
works exactly as a shotgun, as per page 99 of the Traveller 
Core Rulebook.
Siren
All Lawmasters carry a high-powered siren to alert citizens 
of a Judge in hot pursuit of a perp. The maximum power 
setting of a Lawmaster’s siren is deafening, having a clear 
range of about a mile, though that is of little discomfort to 
a Judge wearing his helmet. Senior Judges are sometimes 
permitted to alter the tone and frequency of their sirens so 
as to create a distinctive sound, allowing perps to know just 
who is tracking them down.
Storage Panniers
Straddling the rear wheel, the storage panniers are armoured 
(6 points of protection) and carry the following items:
• Spares for Bike Cannon, Bike Computer, Communications 
Unit, Cyclops Laser, Headlamps, Nite-Eye Lamp, 
Lawgiver and Vocal Synthesiser.
• Ammunition for Bike Cannon, Scattergun, Lawgiver.
• Cling Net (x2), Cuffs (x2), Spare Medipack, Rad Suit, 
Respirator and Stumm Grenades (x10).
 Lawmaster Armaments
The Lawmaster comes replete with a pair of forward-
mounted 20mm bike cannon and a single, powerful, Cyclops 
laser, housed in the conical collimation focus on the very 
front of the bike and below the Nite Eye.
All the armaments on the Lawmaster can be controlled 
manually, vocally and remotely, with pre-programmed ﬁ re 
instructions given to the bike computer (‘Smash through that 
door, halt after 10 metres and give it both barrels, rapid-ﬁ re, 
with the bike cannon, for 3 seconds...’).
The cannon are linked but can be ﬁ red individually. The 
cannon’s magazines hold 200 20mm shells apiece. The 
Cyclops laser is power-heavy; one burst can be ﬁ red every 
10 rounds (60 seconds), with the laser’s independent 
powerplant recharging from the engine in between.
Weapon Range
Rapid 
Fire Damage Recoil Mass Magazine Notes
 Bike Cannon Ranged (riﬂ  e) Auto 6 3d6+8 2 8 36 (x2) Can be ﬁ red linked or 
individually
 Cyclops Laser Ranged (ri ﬂ e) Auto 4 5d6+6 — 8 — One burst can be 
ﬁ red every 10 rounds 
(60 seconds)
Message Pod
A special shell that is used with the bike cannon is the message pod. This hollow shell is ﬁ tted with a homing device 
and small, independent thrusters that give it a range of 500 kilometres. Used when radio comms are impossible (in 
the Cursed Earth, for instance), a message pod automatically homes to a Sector House or Justice Central, travelling 
at a speed of 200 kilometres per hour until it reaches its homing threshold and drops to a safe retrieval speed.
Every Lawmaster carries three message pods.

===PAGE 104===
 Equipment
103
General 
Mega-City One 
Equipment
The following items are commonly found in Mega-City One 
and are available to citizens, Judges and perps alike.
 Armour and Clothing
Anti-Mugging Suit
First judged too dangerous to be used by the citizens of 
Mega-City One, these armoured suits with vicious spikes 
were later deemed legal by Chief Judge McGruder.
Chameleon Suit
Bending light around the wearer through the use of an alien 
photochromatic material, this lightweight body suit grants a 
+4 DM to all Stealth skill rolls.
Energy Shield
A small, belt-attached device of alien manufacture, the energy 
shield is both rare and expensive, yet in great demand. 
Generating an invisible shield of pulsating energy around any 
medium-sized or small object, this device provides an advanced 
level of protection and is capable of turning aside the strongest 
laser beam or shell – the user gains 12 points of armour 
protection. The internal power system is good for 10 hours of 
continuous use before it needs recharging. Note: the energy 
shield does not provide any protection against melee attacks.
Exo-Suit
Restricted by the Justice Department to factory and 
warehouse use, the exo-suit is a semi-robotic body that is 
strapped in place over the wearer’s own limbs and torso. 
As well as granting a great deal of protection in combat, the 
servo-motors and hydraulics that power the exo-suit greatly 
magnify the wearer’s own strength. An exo-suit will grant a 
+3 bonus to Strength but a –2 penalty to Dexterity whilst it 
is worn.
Radsuit
This all-in-one suit grants the wearer protection from radiation 
exposure and contains a one-hour self-contained air supply. 
The radsuit may be worn over other clothing and armour 
without penalty. The radsuit protects against up to 600 rads 
(see Traveller Core Rulebook , page 142), both initial and 
cumulative exposure.
Pad Armour
Every juve worth his place on the streets knows what the 
current height of fashion is, usually involving improbably 
large knee, elbow and probably shoulder pads. Older punks 
recognise the defensive beneﬁ ts of this ‘pad’ armour and so it 
is popular amongst any who are regularly involved in brawls. 
Pad armour is of little use in a gun ﬁ ght but can provide a 
measure of protection against knives and clubs.
Pad armour offers 4 points of armour protection against 
melee attacks. 
Scramble Helmet
A lightweight helmet with advanced electronics designed to 
block all psionic intrusions, the scramble helmet is an illegal 
device often used by perps who wish to avoid the all-seeing eye 
of the Psi Judges. The scramble helmet penalises any psion 
using Talents or Powers against the wearer with a –6 DM.
Shell Jacket
The shell jacket is standard equipment for the vast majority 
of Citi-Def units and comprises of layers of toughened kevlar 
laminated to a thin plasteel compound. The result, whilst 
heavy, provides a great deal of protection for those expecting 
to enter heavy combat.
A shell jacket provides 10 points of armour protection against 
all attacks.
Sports Armour
An evolution of pad armour, sports armour adds a helmet and 
chest protection, often with plastisteel ribbing within the pads 
to greatly enhance its durability. Though usually seen on the 
jetball ﬁ elds, street versions are available, ostensibly so fans 
can show support for their favourite teams. However, sports 
armour is also common amongst tap gangs who expect to 
face resistance to their operations. It is very common for 
citizens to pay three or even four times the listed amount 
for their sports armour, as the most popular teams typically 
charge a great deal more for their of ﬁ cial merchandise and 
any juve seen supporting a mediocre team is likely to get into 
a great deal of trouble amongst his peers.
Sports armour provides 6 points of armour protection against 
melee attacks.
Thermal Masking Suit
Through using re ﬂ ective and infrared-absorbing materials, 
this thin and lightweight suit is capable of completely 
suppressing the wearer’s heat signature. A character wearing 
a thermal masking suit is invisible to infrared imaging (such 
as a Judge’s Mk II helmet infrared visor ﬁ lter). In addition, 
heat-seeking rounds such as those carried by the Lawgiver 
cannot lock onto the wearer’s heat signature.

===PAGE 105===
 Equipment
104
Armour Table
Armour Type Protection Required Skill Cost (Cr.) Mass (Kg) Notes
Anti-Mugging Suit 1/6 (see Notes) None 1,000 2 Provides 1 point 
of protection from 
ranged attacks, but 
6 points from Melee 
attacks owing to its 
integral spikes
Chameleon Suit 1 (see Notes) None 20,000 2 +4 DM to all Stealth 
skill rolls
Energy Shield 12 (against kinetic 
and energy ranged 
attacks only)
None 30,000 0.5 The internal power 
system is good for 10 
hours of continuous 
use before it needs 
recharging. Note: 
the energy shield 
does not provide any 
protection against 
melee attacks.
Exo Suit 12 Vacc Suit 0 300,000 18 a +3 bonus to 
Strength and  a –2 
penalty to Dexterity.
Rad Suit See Notes None 8,000 2 Protects against up 
to 600 rads.
Pad Armour 4 (against Melee 
attacks only)
None 200 1  
Scramble Helmet 1  5,000 1 Penalises any psion 
using Talents or 
Powers against the 
wearer with a –6 DM.
Shell Jacket 10 None 200,000 12  
Sports Armour 6 (against Melee 
attacks only)
None 300 2.5
Thermal Masking 
Suit
2 None 15,000 3 Wearer is invisible 
to thermal imaging 
devices. Heat 
seeking rounds 
cannot latch onto 
the wearer’s thermal 
signature.
Standard Equipment
Bedset
A citizen never knows when he must leave his apartment, 
block or hideout and sleep rough. This bedroll will ensure a 
good night’s sleep wherever he must lay his head. Consisting 
of an integral sleeping bag and self-in ﬂ ating airbed, the 
bedset can be deﬂ ated, rolled and stored in a small, pouch-
sized covering that ﬁ ts into a carryall for easy portability.
Carryall
This is a simple synthi-leather backpack that is strapped 
to a character’s back, allowing the easy carrying of many 
small objects.
Chain, Plastisteel
A 5 metre length of plastisteel chain can support up to 
1,000kg in weight and withstand up to 20 points of direct 
damage delivered by a ballistic or energy attack.
Communicator
Dozens of different styles of personal communicator are 
available to the citizens of Mega-City One, from tiny throat 
mikes of extremely limited range, to powerful vehicle-
mounted models capable of sending clear messages past 
the upper reaches of the atmosphere to spacecraft waiting 
in high orbit. The maximum range of each communicator is 
listed by its entry in the table below. It should be noted that 
whilst any communicator may be set to a ‘private’ frequency 

===PAGE 106===
 Equipment
105
to avoid interference, the Justice Department is capable 
of monitoring them all. Using a communicator requires a 
Comms skill roll of 4+. Calibrating a communicator to evade 
Justice Department detection and monitoring requires a 
Comms roll of 12+.
Communicators
Type
Maximum 
Range (km)
Mass 
(kg) Cost (Cr.)
Throat Mike 3 — 300
Hand Unit 80 0.5 1,250
Backpack 400 1.5 3,500
Vehicle 
Comms Array
3,000 10 12,500
Crowbar
Used by many unsophisticated criminals to defeat 
electronic locks, the plastisteel crowbar may also be used 
as a crude weapon if they are discovered breaking in to 
a citizen’s apartment. Treat as a Club ( Traveller Core 
Rulebook, page 98).
Face-Changing Machine
Heavily regulated by the Justice Department, a citizen 
may have his face literally changed within ten minutes 
through the use of this specialised atom-scrambling 
machine. Virtually impossible to obtain without extensive 
checks being made into a citizen’s background most 
are purchased on the black market, where they prove 
incredibly expensive. However, actually owning a face-
changing machine permits perps to alter their identities 
without being tracked by the Judges – although voice, 
DNA and fingerprint identifiers remain unchanged.
Most face-changing is handled through licensed premises 
such as the popular Nu-You chain found across the city. 
All such parlours are required to provide a list of clients, 
with images of their new look, to Justice Central on a daily 
basis.
Fire Foam
Designed to give a single powerful burst of ﬁ re-quenching 
foam, this small canister allows a character to ﬁ ght ﬁ res. The 
use of ﬁ re foam extinguishes medium-sized ﬁ res, taking 1d6 
rounds to do so.
Firearms Permit
Virtually impossible for any normal citizen to get hold 
of, permits for ﬁ rearms are issued only by the Justice 
Department and they are strictly controlled. Citizens wanting 
one must demonstrate an impeccable character history and 
demonstrate they are both trustworthy and have a de ﬁ nite 
need of a weapon. This usually requires an Advocate or 
Broker 12+ roll, with a further DM for Social Standing.
The forgery and sale of ﬁ rearms permits on the black market 
is therefore rife. Genuine ﬁ rearm permits are only ever signed 
over to one individual for a single weapon and it has been 
known for many counterfeit permits to make the mistake 
of listing several weapons. The details of every ﬁ rearms 
permit issued by the Justice Department is kept on record 
within MAC and is immediately accessible to every Judge, 
although citizens are also given a small slug containing the 
relevant information. Counterfeit ﬁ rearms permits are highly 
unlikely to have records altered within MAC. 
Flashlight
A simple handheld xenon torch to provide illumination 
within darkness. Provides a beam of light that extends in 
a cone up to 200 feet long and 20 feet wide. The battery 
is widely available for Cr. 2 and is good for 1,000 hours of 
continuous use.
Grappling Hook
A far cry from the relatively sophisticated sucker gun and 
claw grapple, the grappling hook is merely a ﬁ xed metal, 
multi-pronged hook attached to the end of a 20-metre line. A 
grappling hook can support 200 kilograms of weight before 
snapping.
Hammer
A simple tool with a multitude of uses in mechanical, technical 
and computer ﬁ elds. The hammer may be used as a club in 
melee combat.
Handcuffs
Though a far cry from the Justice Department issue, these 
handcuffs are moulded from toughened plasteen and are still 
capable of holding a subject ﬁ rm. An Athletics (co-ordination) 
12+ roll must be made to be free from the handcuffs. 
Infrared Visor
This is a lightweight but technologically sophisticated visor 
that will allow any character to see in absolute darkness up 
to a distance of 10 metres by registering the heat signatures 
of his surroundings and nearby creatures.
Life Support Machine
Standard issue within hospitals and well-equipped 
ambulances, the life support machine promises salvation to 
even those grievously wounded. It takes a Signiﬁ cant Action 
and a Medic 8+ roll to properly hook up a wounded character 
to a life support machine; however, once inside, the character 
is automatically stabilised, no matter how badly wounded he 

===PAGE 107===
 Equipment
106
is and will be kept alive regardless of the effects of poison, 
disease or radiation, until specialist medical aid is available.
Lock, Electronic
The standard measure to secure any box, door or car within 
Mega-City One, electronic locks can be relatively cheap, 
though many wealthier citizens are keen to invest in the very 
latest technology to protect their belongings. Those bought on 
the black market may not be automatically opened by a Judge’s 
override card and are thus illegal. Locks have a security rating 
between 8 and 15. Any character with an electronic toolkit may 
by-pass an electronic lock as a Signiﬁ cant Action by making 
an Engineer (electronics) roll using the security rating of the 
lock as the target to throw on 2d6.
Lock, Mechanical
Virtually obsolete in Mega-City One, mechanical locks 
provide a measure of false security to poorer citizens. In 
practice, such mechanical devices operated by keys do 
little more than slow down a perp intent on gaining entry to 
whatever it protects. Mechanical locks have a security rating 
between 2 and 8. Any character with a mechanical toolkit 
may bypass a mechanical lock as a Signi ﬁ cant Action by 
making a successful Mechanic roll using the security rating 
of the lock as the target to throw on 2d6.
Lock Hacker
A more primitive device than a Judge’s override card, the 
lock hacker is a small plastic slug that allows a citizen to 
break through any electronic lock with a successful Engineer 
or Mechanic roll using the security rating of the lock as the 
target to throw on 2d6. The hacker can also be used on 
mechanical locks as it is thin enough to slide between doors 
and frames. 
The possession of a lock hacker will earn a citizen at least 3 
years in an iso-cube if he is caught with one by a Judge.
Medipack
This medipack contains magnabind bandages, painkiller hypos 
and usually, anti-rad pills, allowing a character to treat almost any 
injury. Each medipack is good for one use only. The standard 
medipack contains a variety of dressings that can be used to 
arrest bleeding and prevent further damage from complications 
if a successful Medic roll is made. The medipack does not, 
itself, augment the Medic skill, but it contains the essential items 
necessary to apply First Aid at the scene, pending additional 
medical treatment at a suitable facility.
Respirator
This is a full-face mask designed to ﬁ lter out harmful 
gases and atmospheres. However, it also has its own self-
contained 10 minute oxygen supply. If attacked by gas whilst 
not wearing a respirator, a character must make a Dexterity 
8+ roll in order to ﬁ t it in time.
Riot Foam Cutters
An unlicensed and highly illegal version of Justice 
Department issue equipment, a pair of riot foam cutters 
utilises sharp cutting blades combined with a chemical agent 
that neutralises the foam on contact. These cutters can free 
a citizen trapped in riot foam in one standard action.
Rope
Constructed of high tensile, woven plasteen ﬁ bres, the common 
rope is still a tool of great use in the high-technology metropolis 
of Mega-City One. A standard length of rope is 10 metres.
Scope
There are many different models of scope available in Mega-
City One but they are all designed to accomplish the same 
function. Mounted upon any weapon of large size or greater, a 
scope incorporates telescopic lenses and laser range-ﬁ nding 
to greatly increase the accuracy of any shot ﬁ red at extreme 
ranges. A scope provides a +1 DM to any weapon that has 
been aimed, as per the Traveller Core Rulebook, page 102.
Silencer
A silencer deadens the sound of ﬁ ring from any projectile 
weapon. Fitting a silencer is a Signi ﬁ cant Action and the 
weapon will issue no more than a dull, muf ﬂ ed thud within 
3 metres; beyond that, nothing can be heard. A silenced 
weapon may not be rapid- ﬁ red. Only projectile pistol or ri ﬂ e 
weapons may be ﬁ tted with a silencer.
Speedheal Machine
Once stabilised by a life support machine, a seriously injured 
character greatly bene ﬁ ts from a speedheal machine. Only 
found in Sector Houses and the best of hospitals, the 
speedheal machine is an expensive device that, through 
molecular manipulation, rapidly cures and heals any subject 
placed within its sensors. It requires a Medic 8+ roll to 
successfully operate a speedheal machine and a subject 
cannot speedheal himself. The machine provides healing as 
per Medical Care ( Traveller Core Rulebook , page 75) but 
does so within 6 hours, rather than 24.
Toolkit, Electrical
Designed to allow a character to perform various repairs and 
modiﬁ cations to high technology devices such as advanced 
weapons, vehicles and robots, the electrical toolkit provides 
all the tools necessary. Engineer (electronics) rolls are made 
in conjunction with the electrical toolkit; some tasks are 
impossible without one but in general, the toolkit provides a 
+1 DM to the skill roll.

===PAGE 108===
 Equipment
107
Toolkit, Electronic
Comprising of a set of high technology tools such as 
chip decoders, circuit analysis scanners and the like, the 
electronic toolkit is essential for any Engineer (electronics) 
or Computers roll made to disable, repair or modify devices 
such as computer systems, electronic locks and robot 
brains.
Toolkit, Mechanical
A set of basic and low technology tools (screwdrivers, 
spanners, feeler gauges and so on) with which to perform 
any mechanically-based task, such as repairing a vehicle’s 
engine, breaking through a mechanical lock or modifying a 
simple weapon. The toolkit is essential for some tasks that 
make use of either the Engineer or Mechanic skill.
Item Cost (Cr.) Mass (kg)
Bedset 75 1.5
Blanket 20 1
Carryall 50 0.5
Chain, plastisteel 125 1
Crowbar 65 2
Face Changing Machine 125,000 1,000
Fire Foam 200 0.5
Firearms Permit 100 —
Flashlight 50 0.25
Grappling Hook 150 1
Hammer 40 0.5
Handcuffs 350 0.25
Infrared Visor 900 —
Life Support Machine 225,000 1,250
Lock, Electronic 8+ 700 —
Lock, Electronic 9+ 1,000 —
Lock, Electronic 10+ 1,300 —
Lock, Electronic 11+ 1,600 —
Lock, Electronic 12+ 1,900 —
Lock, Electronic 13+ 2,200 —
Lock, Electronic 14+ 2,500 —
Lock, Electronic 15+ 2,800 —
Lock, Mechanical 2+ 60 —
Lock, Mechanical 3+ 80 —
Lock, Mechanical 4+ 100 —
Lock, Mechanical 5+ 120 —
Lock, Mechanical 6+ 140 —
Lock, Mechanical 7+ 160 —
Lock, Mechanical 8+ 180 —
Lock Hacker 5,000 —
Medipack 800 1
Respirator 400 0.5
Riot Foam Cutters 12,500 3
Rope, 30m 200 —
Scope 1,750 0.25
Silencer 500 —
Speedheal Machine 600,000 1,250
Toolkit, advanced electrical 6,000 3
Toolkit, advanced 
electronic
20,000 2
Toolkit, advanced 
mechanical
3,500 6
Tripod 200 4
Craze Equipment
Mega-City One has dozens of legal and illegal crazes, many 
of which rely on equipment, drugs and augmentation to 
make them possible.
Appetite Inducer
An illegal ingredient necessary to produce the largest fatties 
in the city. Proscribed by the Justice Department, just a few 
drops of an appetite inducer will cause a subject to crave 
food above all else for a period of one hour. Greater doses 
can have a disastrous effect as the subject will be forced 
to make an Endurance 8+ roll every round for 1-3 hours or 
be forced to consume whatever objects are nearby, be they 
dead, living or inanimate.
 Batglider
Also called a bat suit, this is an all-in-one clothing set with 
large, ﬂ exible wings stretching between hands and feet 
that, when ﬁ lled with oncoming air, provide lift, allowing the 
wearer to glide. Batting is incredibly popular within some 
blocks and the air around their peaks is often ﬁ lled with 
batters every evening, catching thermals and experiencing 
a kind of freedom previously unknown to them. A batglider 
can support up to 150kg and provides ﬂ ight for up to 60 
minutes. The wearer must make a Flyer (personal) 8+ roll 
to successfully control the batsuit. The batglider, possessing 
no engine, is absolutely silent in use.
 Belliwheel
An essential device for any fattie wishing to retain a degree 
of mobility, the belliwheel is simply a sitting device on which 
two heavily reinforced wheels are mounted. A fattie sits 
upon the belliwheel and moves himself around with his legs, 
supported by the device. A belliwheel will change a fattie’s 
speed to 6 metres per Combat Round and permit him to run 
(instead of waddle).
 Boing®
Launched as a miracle spray, Boing® envelops its user in 
an almost impervious bubble, allowing him to bounce from 
the highest blocks without harm. Often seen as the best rush 
available in Mega-City One, any use of Boing® outside of the 
Palais-de-Boing® is rewarded with a mandatory sentence 
of twenty years in an iso-cube. Using a can of Boing® is a 
Signiﬁ cant Action. Whilst encased in Boing®, a character is 
immune to any amount of falling damage and gains armour 
to the equivalent of 30 points. If a Boing® bubble takes any 
amount of ﬁ re damage, it will immediately stick to the next 
surface it strikes, holding the user immobile until cut free. 
Anything struck by a fast-moving bouncing Boing® bubble 
sustains 4d6 points of damage and causes the bubble to 
bounce away. A successful Dex or Athletics (co-ordination) 
8+ roll halves this damage. Boing® can only be safely 

===PAGE 109===
 Equipment
108
removed through the use of specialised Boing® cutters. It 
may only be purchased legally in the Palais-de-Boing® and 
its removal from the building is not permitted – but this does 
not prevent unscrupulous perps – Boing®-Peddlers – from 
gaining access to illegal supplies and selling aerosols to 
eager Boingers® at vastly in ﬂ ated prices. The sentence for 
illegally supplying Boing® is forty years in an iso-cube.
Boing® Cutters
A set of heavy-duty cutters, not unlike bolt-cutters, this device 
secretes a chemical agent along its blades that tears through 
Boing® quickly and easily. Their availability is restricted to 
the Justice Department and the Palais-de-Boing® in order to 
cut down on the use of illegal Boinging® in public.
Ganja
Currently enjoying a resurgence within Mega-City One, 
Mega-Skunk is generally agreed to be the best strain of 
this home-grown weed and is guaranteed to mellow out any 
citizen. Naturally, it is highly illegal.
Instant Fuzz
Available in a spray canister, this is spray-on hair, attaching 
itself to any exposed skin and growing exponentially to create 
thick, matted fur. This is typically used against unsuspecting 
victims, who are not harmed by the experience but are likely 
to be left completely humiliated until they can wash or shave 
it off.
Para-Glider
The forerunner of the batglider, para-gliders are large wings 
attached to a frame in which one or two citizens sit or lie 
before hurling themselves off the tallest block they can ﬁ nd 
and soaring for many hours. The batglider has now overtaken 
this model in terms of popularity and most are now found 
only within the armouries of Citi-Def units mad enough to 
contemplate airborne assaults. Like the batglider, this device 
is silent in use and operates in a similar way. It can carry up 
to 500kg in weight.
Spray Paint
Specially formulated spray paints may be purchased, 
resistant to all attempts to remove their stain aside from the 
Justice Department’s own clean up squads. Available in a 
variety of colours.
Sugar
Listed as being one of the less potent drugs available on the 
black market, the Justice Department works hard to quash any 
possession for it not only causes extreme damage to teeth but 
often leads to harder substances. No Judge believes a citizen 
has the willpower to take just a little sugar each day to improve 
his life and stay immune to its addictive effects.
 Umpty Candy
Declared illegal, with its inventor, Uncle Ump, being exiled 
to roam the galaxy aboard a single spaceship, Umpty Candy 
is in exceedingly short supply and thus commands vast 
sums, affordable by only the insanely rich. Nevertheless, 
secret Umpty Parties, fuelled by small amounts of Umpty 
Candy, are popular with Mega-City One’s wealthy. The 
candy is, perhaps, the most delicious taste ever created. 
It is also highly addictive. Anyone consuming more than 
1d6+1 portions (about the size of an average chocolate 
bar) becomes addicted. He must make an Endurance 10+ 
roll every day to control the cravings (or starts to suffer 
hallucinations involving giant bars of Umpty Candy) and to 
prevent from becoming violent when denied a supply.
Item Cost (Cr.) Mass (kg)
Appetite Inducer 250 —
Batglider 400 18
Belliwheel 1,800 90
Boing® (1 use) 600 —
Boing® Cutters 1,250 3
Ganja (10 doses) 200 —
Instant Fuzz 65 —
Para Gilder 800 20
Spray Paint 35 —
Sugar (10 doses) 60 —
Umpty Candy (1 bar or 6 
sweets)
1,000 —
Food, Drink and Shelter
 Munce and Foodstuffs A, B 
and C
A bewildering variety of foodstuffs are available to Mega-City 
One’s citizens. By far the most common are those derived 
from munce, a disgusting plant-derived protein paste that 
can be reﬁ ned through many processes to create almost 
any taste and texture: few citizens realise what they are truly 
eating. Other synthetic foodstuffs abound, all produced by 
the competing corporations of Mega-City One. A relatively 
new entry into the food market is the Justice Department 
itself, producing the extremely tasty Foodstuffs A, B and 
C. Being a Justice Department product, no ingredients are 
listed on the packages of these foods but many citizens are 
coming to agree that these are the very best tasting meals 
on the market, despite the bland name. 
Living Accommodation
Every family in Mega-City One is assigned a single 
apartment within one of the immense city blocks towering 
over the streets and skedways. Most Judge characters 
reside in Sector House dormitories. However, some may 
eventually have a three-roomed apartment in a Justice 

===PAGE 110===
 Equipment
109
Department-owned skyscraper, rather than a city block, and 
it is not uncommon for several Judges to share several ﬂ oors 
of a building or for an entire building to house nothing but 
Judges.
A standard apartment consists of a living room, bathroom 
and bedroom, modestly equipped with reasonable furniture, 
a vid screen, computer terminal (with access to MAC and 
the Sector House system) and cooking facilities. At this 
standard, the Justice Department pays all accommodation 
costs but if a Judge wants something fancier or larger, he 
will have to ﬁ nance it himself somehow.
Typical Food and 
Accommodation Costs
Accommodation, Stacker   Cr. 20/night
Accommodation, Basic   Cr. 50/night
Accommodation, Standard   Cr. 100 night
Accommodation, Luxury   Cr. 250 night
Apartment, City Block   Cr. 100 month
Apartment, Conapt   Cr. 300 month
Apartment, Luxy-Block   Cr. 1,500+ /month
Apartment, Slum Block   —
Gooey Bar    Cr. 4 
Justice Department Foodstuff A  Cr. 10 
Justice Department Foodstuff B  Cr. 24 
Justice Department Foodstuff C  Cr. 36 
Munce Pudding    Cr. 14 
Munceburger    Cr. 10 
Munce Meal (3-course ready meal) Cr. 20
Plasti-Flakes (25 servings)   Cr. 22 
Rat Burger    Cr. 2 
Soycola    Cr. 4 
Synthi-Caf    Cr. 3 
Synthi-Ale    Cr. 8 
Munce Juice   Cr. 1
Special Mega-City One Services
The advanced technology available in Mega-City One 
means that many remarkable, desirable and often illegal 
services are within the grasp of citizens and, thus, perps. 
New services, based on the clever and creative use of 
technology appear every few months, last for as long as the 
craze does and then quietly lapse into obsolescence. Others 
endure and these are described here.
 Face-Changing
Heavily monitored by the Justice Department, there are 
many face-changing clinics dotted around the sectors of 
Mega-City One. Utilising molecular-scrambling technologies, 
these clinics change the appearance of any citizen, willing 
to pay the fee, within minutes and for many of the richer 
residents this can almost turn into a craze, with faces being 
changed every week. However, the Judges keep track of 
all face-changing operations, automatically updating their 
Public Surveillance Unit computers, in order to foil attempts 
by perps on the run to conceal their identities.
Using a Face Changing clinic, such as Nu-You, costs Cr. 
1,000 for a basic operation. The customer selects the 
face type he wants from a series of menu options and the 
molecular ﬁ zzog conﬁ guration machines get to work. More 
radical operations cost upwards of Cr. 1,000, usually in 
blocks of Cr. 500. It is possible to have one’s face changed 
to approximate an alien, a ﬁ lm star or a historical ﬁ gure but 
such operations always cost premium prices.
When using a Face Changer the customer must roll 2d6. 
On a natural roll of 2 something untoward has happened: a 
malfunction or other error. Roll 1d6 for the result:
1. Face is changed to something completely against 
what the client ordered.
2. Client is rendered ugly.
3. Client is rendered very ugly.
4. 1d3 facial features are distorted (diminished or 
enhanced) giving the appearance of mutation.
5. 1d3 facial features are scrambled – moved around 
the face and giving the appearance of mutation.
6. 1d3 facial features are removed and not 
reassembled; the affected area is covered with a 
perfectly smooth patch of skin.
 Palais-de-Boing®
Boing® returns every few years as a popular craze within the 
city but, thus far, the only place where a citizen may legally 
use the miracle spray is within the giant Palais-de-Boing®, 
a block-sized structure ﬁ lled with tubes, gigantic pinball 
machines and high drops designed to provide the maximum 
enjoyment for the Boing® enthusiast. It is a sad fact, 
however, that many users still consider a Boing® through 
the actual city to be the ultimate thrill. An hour’s worth of 
time in a Palais-de-Boing® costs Cr. 200 and includes both 
Boing® spray and being cut out of the stuff at the end of the 
session.
 Smokatorium
Smoking tobacco of any form (the hugely expensive ‘real’ 
tobacco or the more common synthibac, made from munce) 
is illegal anywhere in Mega-City One with the exception of 
a Smokatorium. Here, smokers, clad in protective, ﬁ shbowl-
helmeted suits, puff away in their thousands, ﬁ lling the levels 
of the Smokatorium with a vastly poisonous mixture of 
chemicals that are, eventually, ﬁ ltered and removed. Anyone 

===PAGE 111===
 Equipment
110
stepping into a Smokatorium without breathing apparatus 
must succeed in an End 10+ roll or sustain 1d6 suffocation and 
poisoning damage to his Endurance characteristic for each 
round that he remains in the Smokatorium unprotected.
It costs Cr. 50 for half an hour’s use of the Smokatorium, 
which includes suit rental and a complimentary packet of 3 
synthibac cigarillos (different brands and types of smokes 
can be purchased at the adjoining Smokatorium shop, with 
prices varying from Cr. 20 for a basic pack of 20 cigarettes, 
up to Cr. 10,000 for the ﬁ nest, vintage, Cuba City cigars.
Taxi Costs
It costs Cr. 5 for each kilometre travelled within one of the 
millions of taxis circulating the streets and megways of Mega-
City One. Human drivers are gradually being phased out in 
favour of robo-taxis which are a great deal more reliable and 
cheaper for the companies that run them, but a citizen will 
be able to ﬂ ag down a taxi within minutes in any but the most 
run-down slum sectors of the city.
 Weapons
Weapons can only be held legally with a Justice Department 
permit but, for those lucky enough to be granted a licence, 
there is an array of weaponry available.
Antique Revolver
Relics from the 20
th and 21 st Centuries, many citizens 
possess an antique revolver illegally, having had it passed 
down through the generations of their family as an heirloom. 
Six rounds are carried in each antique revolver, which must 
be loaded individually.
Claw Grapple
A far more powerful version of the sucker gun, this weapon 
is most often found in the armouries of Citi-Def units, though 
they are also popular amongst criminal organisations. 
Pneumatically powered claws enable the grapple to bite 
into the toughest of materials, allowing the wielder to either 
swing along the high-tensile mono ﬁ lament cable or select 
the retract switch and be pulled up to the grapple head. 
A maximum weight of 200kg may be suspended from the 
cable of a claw grapple. Firing a grapple successfully into 
its target requires a roll of Dex 9+ with further DMs for Gun 
Combat. The reel has a maximum range of 1,000 metres 
and, when set to winch its load, the rate of travel is 50 metres 
per 100kg of load.
Club
Not strictly a weapon as such, the club is any heavy, metre-long 
implement a citizen may pick up to smash the brains of another.
Concussion Grenade
Also called the stun grenade, this weapon is designed to 
simply subdue several enemies at once, rather than blast 
them apart. All characters within this weapon’s area of effect 
must make an End 10+ roll or be stunned for 1d3 rounds.
Electro-Prod
Used to herd wild creatures in the Cursed Earth, a few 
electro-prods have made their way into Mega-City One, 
where they are used as torture devices and by criminals 
who wish to avoid facing murder charges. The electro-prod 
causes electrical subdual damage.
Electra Zap Gun
A brightly coloured and decorative weapon, the electra 
zap gun has clean lines that were designed to intimidate. 
However, its electro-charge is utterly harmless and merely 
stuns its victims for a short period of time, making it suitable 
for the perp who does not wish to add a murder charge 
to his time in the iso-cubes or who constantly deals with 
heavily armoured enemies. The electra zap gun has a 
maximum range of 2 metres and any target struck is dealt 
an electrical jolt of 2d6 points of damage to a single physical 
characteristic. However, the effects of the electra zap gun 
are notoriously short-lived and injuries recovery at the rate of 
1 point every round. The greatest bene ﬁ t of the electra zap 
gun is its twin-barrelled design, making it extremely potent 
at such close ranges. The weapon uses a light power pack 
which holds enough energy for 40 shots.
Fire Bomb
Fire bombs are explosive grenades designed speci ﬁ cally 
to spread ﬁ re. Fire bombs deal 1d6 points of ﬁ re damage 
within their area of effect of 3 metres. A successful Dex 8+ 
or Survival 8+ roll halves the damage. The bomb continues 
to burn for 1d6 rounds, generating a further 1d6 points of ﬁ re 
damage every round until extinguished.
Flesh Disintegrator
A monstrous and highly illegal exotic weapon, most often 
used as a booby trap to protect vulnerable areas in a perp’s 
lair, due to its immense size. Any living creature caught within 
its area of effect must make either a Dex 8+ or Survival 8+ 
roll or be automatically slain as their ﬂ esh is disintegrated 
from their bones. The ﬂ esh disintegrator uses a heavy power 
pack, which holds enough energy for 5 shots.

===PAGE 112===
 Equipment
111
Assault Carbine, West and 
Smithson .78 Magnum
A carbine-format assault weapon that is a favourite amongst perps wanting to pack hefty ﬁ repower, the assault carbine is ﬁ tted with a 
ﬂ ash suppressor, a fully retractable and detachable stock and a 60-round capacity magazine. The weapon can be set to Rapid Fire , 
allowing it to ﬁ re in Burst Mode, as described under the section on Automatic Weapons on page 62 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.


===PAGE 113===
 Equipment
112
Hand Bomb
One of the simplest of all modern weapons, the humble 
grenade still finds its way into the hands of perps in 
Mega-City One. Though often superseded by the hi-ex 
pack and concussion grenade, which both do a better job 
of causing devastation or subduing enemies respectively, 
the hand bomb is a cheap alternative for street gangs and 
low-life punks. 
Hand Cannon, West and 
Smithson .408 Recoilless
A fat, stubby handgun ﬁ tted with a gauss ﬁ eld generator along 
the length of the barrel, the hand cannon is very accurate 
at short ranges, completely recoilless and packs a massive 
punch with its .408 ammunition. Some variations of the hand 
cannon include an integral xenon projector which casts a 3 
metre diameter burst of daylight up to a range of 10 metres, 
when activated, bypassing any penalties for darkness. The 
magazine ﬁ ts into the handgrip and holds 18 rounds.
Hand Gun, Walther Mitsubishi 
PPK II
Probably the most common weapon on the streets of Mega-
City One, the PPK II is a good, solid design, enabling even 
the clumsiest citizen to successfully threaten his enemies. 
Both light and powerful, handguns form the staple of many 
criminal organisations, particularly in the lower ranks. The 
magazine of this weapon holds 20 shots.
Heavy Duty Disintegrator
Typically used in industrial construction and demolition, 
the licences for heavy duty disintegrators are rigorously 
controlled by the Justice Department, thus making them 
command a huge price on the black market. Highly effective 
at creating holes within walls and other obstructions, their 
effect on living creatures is lethal. Any living creature caught 
within the area of effect of a heavy duty disintegrator must 
make either a Dex 8+ or Survival 8+ roll or be automatically 
slain. The heavy duty disintegrator uses a heavy power pack 
which holds enough energy for 16 shots. 
Heavy Laser, Tac Systems Mx. 
Light Blaster
Legal heavy lasers in Mega-City One are to be found on the 
rebuilt City Wall bordering the Cursed Earth in the hands of 
Judges, though a few also exist within Citi-Def units. They are 
highly prized by perps looking to cause maximum damage in 
their criminal activities, for each heavy laser is fully capable 
of blasting apart almost any vehicle or small building with a 
single high-powered shot. Usually found in shoulder-mounted 
models, the heavy laser weighs an incredible amount but it 
can be difﬁ cult ﬁ nding a more powerful or versatile weapon 
in the same class. The heavy laser uses a heavy power pack 
which holds enough energy for 50 shots.
Heavy Spitgun, 
Rasterblaster RB-32
Manufactured by the renowned rapid ﬁ re experts, 
Rasterblaster, this larger spitgun features an elongated 
barrel, huge magazine capacity and a bipod to support its 
weight for stable ﬁ ring. It retains the high rate of ﬁ repower of 
the spitgun and, unlike its smaller cousins, has an ammunition 
capacity that allows it to keep ﬁ ring in extended battles. The 
magazine of the heavy spitgun holds 120 rounds.
Hi-Ex Missile
A simple, no-brainer weapon, the hi-ex missile is ﬁ red from a 
launcher and is capable of causing a vast amount of damage 
at great ranges.
Hi-Ex Pack
A ﬂ at-pack, high-explosive charge, this weapon has 
molecular hooks on its main surfaces, allowing it to literally 
stick to any surface on an accurate throw (Dex 8+ or 
Athletics (co-ordination) 8+). Though sometimes used as 
a large grenade, the hi-ex pack is more commonly used 
as a time-delayed bomb and is capable of causing a great 
degree of devastation when well placed. The blast can be 
delayed from initial priming for between 1 second and 24 
hours through a simple digital readout. Placing and priming 
a hi-ex pack is a Signiﬁ cant Action.
Homing Missile
Sacriﬁ cing an over-sized warhead for a tracking system and 
complex ﬂ ight controls, the homing missile is the payload of 
choice for those demanding the highest accuracy from their 
heavy weapons. As long as at least one signi ﬁ cant action is 
spent aiming, with this missile loaded in a launcher, the homing 
missile can lock on to any target of small size or larger, granting 
the wielder a +4 DM to his attack roll. A homing missile ﬁ red 
without spending at least one action aiming receives no DM.
Hypo Dart Gun
Developed from the tranquilliser gun used by med-squads 
to pacify kooks and futsies, the hypo dart gun carries a 
powerful tranquillising agent designed to knock out any 
living creature within seconds. A living target hit by a hypo 
dart gun must make an End 10+ roll every round for 1d6 
rounds or fall unconscious for 1d3 hours. However, the hypo 
dart is useless against armoured opponents. Any target that 
wears more than 2 points of armour protection is immune to 

===PAGE 114===
 Equipment
113
its effects. The hypo dart gun holds only one dart at any one 
time and must be manually reloaded after each shot.
Las-Burner
Designed as an industrial cutting tool, some perps favour the las-
burner as an assault weapon, despite its great bulk. Intended to 
cut through solid plastisteel girders and walls with ease, it can 
also make light work of the strongest bank vaults and safes. Any 
character with a Strength of less than 10 using a las-burner as a 
melee weapon suffers a –2 penalty to attack rolls.
Laser Lance, Weptek LL Mk II
A rare weapon that can be dif ﬁ cult to ﬁ nd and even harder 
to ﬁ nance, the laser lance is developed along the same 
principles as the laser riﬂ e but concentrates a huge amount 
of energy within its red-hot capacitors before releasing it in 
a torrent of searing light several inches in diameter. The 
laser lance can cause more damage than almost any other 
laser weapon of its size, though at the expense of draining 
its power pack at a far faster rate. The laser lance takes one 
Combat Round to recharge its capacitors after ﬁ ring and may 
not be used during this time. The laser lance uses a medium 
power pack which holds enough energy for 6 shots.
Laser Pistol, Walther 
Mitsubishi LPK I
Rare due to its sheer expense, the LPK I is an awesome 
weapon with perhaps only the Justice Department’s own 
Lawgiver matching its raw power as a pistol. The thin beam 
of coherent light emitted with each shot from a laser pistol is 
capable of causing serious injury and, despite the high value 
they command on the black market, they are becoming 
increasingly common on the streets, in the hands of perps 
seeking the ultimate killing-power. The laser pistol uses a 
light power pack which holds enough energy for 20 shots.
Las-Knife
Ostensibly a common kitchen utensil found in the homes 
of many citizens, the las-knife is also popular amongst 
skilled assassins looking for a completely untraceable, 
silent weapon. It retains all the disadvantages of an ordinary 
plasteen knife but has a much keener edge and is capable of 
causing serious injury when in the right hands.
Las-Saw
Commonly found in factories, sales of the las-saw are not 
restricted by the Justice Department and many citizens 
with a constructing or artistic bent in their crazes possess 
one. Though it does not have anything like the raw cutting 
power of the industrial strength las-burner, the las-saw is 
nevertheless a useful tool and its light weight enables it to 
be wielded effectively in combat.
Lazooka, General Arms Laser 
Destroyer Mk III
Confused by some as a missile launcher until it ﬁ res, the 
lazooka is seen by many Citi-Def personnel as the ultimate 
development in laser technology. Fired over the shoulder, 
just like a missile launcher, the lazooka expends the entire 
energy of its power pack in one, barely-controlled blast of 
unleashed energy. The lazooka uses a heavy power pack 
which holds enough energy for just a single shot.
Light Disintegrator
A light, hand-held device no larger than a pistol, this 
weapon packs lethal killing force and possession alone 
will send a citizen to the iso-cubes for a minimum of 6 
years. Working on the same principles as the more 
powerful heavy duty disintegrator, this version is fully 
capable of rendering a human to his component atoms. 
Any living creature hit by a light disintegrator must make 
either a Dex 6+ or Survival 6+ roll or be automatically 
slain. The light disintegrator uses a light power pack 
which holds enough energy for 3 shots.
Missile Launcher, Mauley H/HE 
‘Snub-Nose’
The missile launcher is a relatively cheap heavy weapon, 
though users will soon ﬁ nd its relative cheapness is 
outweighed by the cost of each missile it ﬁ res. However, it 
proves to be both a powerful and versatile weapon and yet 
remains simple to use. The missile launcher may only hold 
one missile at any one time and so must be reloaded every 
time it is ﬁ red.
Robowhip
Used to discipline troublesome robots, the two-metre long 
robowhip is covered with ﬁ ne electrodes producing a current 
of high voltage but low wattage that causes a mere tingle 
in a human but is incredibly painful to a droid. Each strike 
by a robowhip upon a robot will cause 1 point of damage 
to the robot’s Endurance that is recovered within one hour. 
A robot reduced to 0 Endurance by a robowhip will not be 
destroyed but instead disabled for a period of one hour, until 
its Endurance begins to return.
Sawn-off Stump Gun, General 
Arms Sg-1 X
A common modi ﬁ cation made to many stump guns is to 
reduce the length of their barrel. Aside from making the 
weapon far easier to carry and conceal, it also forces the 
pellet shot to spread out in a far greater arc, potentially 
causing greater casualties though at a greatly reduced 
range. The sawn-off stump gun stores 8 rounds, pumped 
from beneath its barrel, which must be loaded individually.

===PAGE 115===
 Equipment
114
Laser Rifle, Mauley M500 
‘Hunter-Stalker’
Laser riﬂ es are even more expensive than laser pistols but pack a far more powerful punch. They are favoured by killers 
who prefer to attack at great ranges in order to avoid detection and many will be retro ﬁ tted with advanced scopes and 
target ﬁ nders. The laser riﬂ e uses a medium power pack which holds enough energy for 10 shots.


===PAGE 116===
 Equipment
115
Smoke Bombs
Sometimes used by Justice Department riot squads to quell 
mobs or ﬂ ush out perps, many types of smoke bomb have 
made their way into the hands of citizens. Throwing up a 
dense cloud of smoke, they make perfect tools for covering 
an escape or confusing an enemy. Any character caught 
within its area of effect suffers a –4 DM to all attacks.
Sonic Cannon, Hondai 
Ultrasound
Normally found only mounted on larger vehicles, the sonic 
cannon is used by both the Justice Department and Citi-
Def units to pacify large mobs quickly and easily. The sonic 
cannon causes subdual damage to every living creature 
within its area of effect. A sonic cannon may be used against 
vehicles, buildings and other solid structures in the same 
way as the sonic blaster delivering 3d6 points of damage 
automatically every round without the need for any attack 
rolls, ignoring any Hull points or armour. When not directly 
powered by a vehicle it can accept a large power pack, which 
provides enough energy for 2 shots.
Spear
The spear is a primitive weapon and most citizens would 
expect to see one only in the hands of a primitive undercity 
dweller or a Cursed Earth mutant. However, some juves will 
take to sharpening long lengths of plasteen girder in order to 
use them in gang disputes when more powerful weapons are 
not available. The spear has reach and can strike opponents 
up to 2 metres distant. A spear can also be thrown.
Spitgun, Weptek 12mm
Using ammunition similar to that of a hand gun but slightly 
larger in calibre, the spitgun is a carbine-format ri ﬂ e with a 
high rate of ﬁ re. Spitguns can ﬁ re a single shot, a burst of 
three shots or on full automatic mode. The spitgun magazine 
holds 30 rounds.
Spit Pistol, Rasterblaster 
RB-03
A tiny weapon of lethal capability, the spit pistol owes 
much in design to its larger cousins but compacts a 
high rate of fire into a pistol no larger than a handgun. 
Its small magazine holds enough ammunition for only a 
few seconds worth of continuous firing but it is a highly 
concealable weapon that has gained a lot of respect 
amongst criminal organisations. The magazine of a spit 
pistol holds 12 rounds.
Stump Gun, General Arms Sg-1 X
The stump gun is a ri ﬂ e-sized weapon that ﬁ res cartridges 
ﬁ lled with many individual pellets. It is not capable of 
causing the damage of a traditional bullet or shell-based 
ﬁ rearm but instead throws its shot over a greater target 
area, potentially wounding several targets at once. A 
mechanical toolkit and a Mechanic 8+ roll turns a stump 
gun into a sawn-off stump gun. Failing the Mechanic roll 
ruins the weapon, rendering it unable to ﬁ re until a further 
Mechanic 10+ roll can be made to rectify the damage. The 
stump gun stores 8 rounds, loaded individually, pumped 
from beneath its barrel.
Sucker Gun
An older version of the claw grapple, sucker guns can 
now be picked up relatively cheaply and are not even 
classed as illegal by the Justice Department, though 
their actual use often is. The sucker gun has neither the 
range nor the strength of a claw grapple and uses a gas-
powered ‘sucker’ on the end of its line in order to gain 
a purchase on walls and ceilings. A maximum weight 
of 100kg may be suspended from the cable of a sucker 
gun. A normal attack roll is made to attach the sucker 
gun to a solid surface.
Zip Gun, Mauley ‘Madam 
Protector’
Often the ﬁ  rst gun possessed by a punk just embarking 
on his criminal career, the zip gun is of laughable power 
when compared to more sophisticated laser or rapid ﬁ re 
technology but it is still more than capable of slaying the 
average citizen with a single shot. Cheaper than a handgun, 
the tiny design of the zip gun limits the calibre of shells ﬁ red 
but hardened perps tend to pass it over simply because it 
lacks any ‘intimidation’ factor.

===PAGE 117===
 Equipment
116
Double-Barrelled Stump 
Gun, General Arms Sg-1 XX
There are several versions of the common stump gun, where two barrels and ﬁ ring chambers are mounted in tandem, 
either side-by-side as with the Sg-1 XX or one atop the other, allowing the wielder to ﬁ re both simultaneously. This weapon 
counts as being a twin-linked stump gun. It stores 8 rounds for each barrel, which must be loaded individually.


===PAGE 118===
 Equipment
117
Sonic Blaster, Hondai 
MegaSound
The sonic blaster is a riﬂ e-sized weapon typically found in service with the rare human sewer-sweeping teams who, whilst not 
permitted to ﬁ eld lethal weaponry, must still protect themselves from the mutants and monsters that exist in the dark, ﬁ lth-ridden 
tunnels. A sonic blaster may also be used against vehicles, buildings and other solid structures to great effect – literally shaking 
them apart. If both the sonic blaster and a non-living target are stationary, 2d6 points of damage will automatically be caused  
every round without the need for any attack rolls, ignoring any Hull or other damage reduction. The sonic blaster uses a medium 
power pack which holds enough energy for 40 shots.


===PAGE 119===
 Equipment
118
Melee Weapons
Weapon Range Damage Heft Mass (kg) Cost (Cr.) Notes
Club Melee (bludgeon) 2d6 0 1 —
Electro Prod Melee (bludgeon) 1d6 — 1 175
Las-Knife Melee (small blade) 1d6 — — 250
Las-Saw Melee (large blade) 3d6 2 3 475
Robo Whip Melee (large blade) 1 — 1 650 Damage applied 
to Endurance only
Spear Melee (small blade) 
or Ranged (thrown)
1d6+3 1 1 —
Slug Throwers
Weapon Range Damage Auto Recoil
Mass 
(kg) Magazine
Cost 
(Cr.)
Ammo 
Cost (Cr.) Notes
Pistols
Antique 
Revolver
Ranged 
(pistol)
3d6–3 No 0 1 6 300 10
Hand Cannon, 
West and 
Smithson .408 
Recoilless
Ranged 
(pistol)
3d6 No –1 1 18 3,000 20
Hand Gun, 
Walther 
Mitsubishi 
PPK II
Ranged 
(pistol)
3d6–3 No 0 0.5 20 1,250 15
Hypo Dart Gun Ranged 
(pistol)
— No 0 1 1 400 8 End 10+ 
roll every 
round for 1d6 
rounds or fall 
unconscious 
for 1d3 hours
Spit Pistol, 
Rasterblaster 
RB-03
Ranged 
(pistol)
3d6–3 No 0 0.5 12 4,500 10 Concealable 
under clothing
Zip Gun, 
Mauley 
Ranged 
(pistol)
2d6–1 No 1 1 6 1,000 8 Concealable 
under clothing
Riﬂ es
Assault 
Carbine, West 
and Smithson 
.78 Magnum
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
3d6 4 1 5 60 8,000 10
Claw Grapple Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
2d6 No 0 10 1 750 20
Double-
Barrelled 
Stump Gun, 
General Arms 
Sg-1 XX
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
4d6 No 2 4 16 (8 per 
barrel)
1,750 10

===PAGE 120===
 Equipment
119
Heavy 
Spitgun, 
Rasterblaster 
RB-32
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
3d6 4 1 16 120 9,500 10
Missile 
Launcher
Ranged 
(rocket)
By Missile No 0 8 1 7,000 10
Sawn-off 
Stump Gun, 
General Arms 
Sg-1 X
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
4d6–2 No 2 3 16 (8 per 
barrel)
1,750 10 Only effective 
at Personal 
and Close 
range.
Spitgun, 
Weptek 12mm
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
3d6 3 1 8 30 6,000 10
Stump Gun, 
General Arms 
Sg-1 X
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
4d6 No 2 3 8 1,500 10
Sucker Gun Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
1d6 No 0 6 1 500 5
Energy Weapons
Weapon Range Damage Auto Recoil
Mass 
(kg) Magazine
Cost 
(Cr.)
Power 
Pack Cost 
(Cr.) Notes
Electra Zap 
Gun
Close 
(max 2m)
2d6 N — 1.5 50 900 200
Laser 
Lance, 
Weptek LL 
Mk II
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
6d6+3 No — 8 6 11,000 1,500 Requires 1 
Combat Round 
before re-ﬁ ring
Laser Pistol, 
Walther 
Mitsubishi 
LPK I
Ranged 
(pistol)
3d6+3 No — 3 20 6,000 1,500
Laser Riﬂ e, 
Mauley 
M500
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
5d6+3 No — 5 10 9,000 1,500
Light 
Disintegrator
Ranged 
(pistol)
Special No — 3 3 15,000 5,000 Dex 6+ or Survival 
6+ roll or be 
automatically slain
Sonic 
Blaster, 
Hondai 
MegaSound
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
2d6 No — 4.5 40 1,500 1,500
Weapon Range Damage Auto Recoil
Mass 
(kg) Magazine
Cost 
(Cr.)
Ammo 
Cost (Cr.) Notes

===PAGE 121===
 Equipment
120
Bombs, Grenades and Missiles
Weapon Range Damage Mass (kg) Blast Radius Cost (Cr.) Notes
Concussion 
Grenade
Ranged 
(thrown)
Special 0.5 6m 100 Roll End 10+ or 
Stunned for 1d3 
rounds
Fire Bomb Ranged 
(thrown)
1d6 0.5 6m 160
Hand Bomb Ranged 
(thrown)
3d6/2d6/1d6 0.5 6m 100
Hi-Ex Pack Ranged 
(thrown) or 
sited
4d6/3d6/2d6 1.5 12m 300
Hi-Ex Missile Ranged 
(rocket)
4d6+3 8 — 800
Homing Missile Ranged 
(rocket)
3d6+3 8 — 1,250 +4 DM when aimed
Smoke Bomb Ranged 
(thrown)
None 0.5 6m 80
Heavy Weapons
Weapon Range Damage Auto Recoil
Mass 
(kg) Magazine
Cost 
(Cr.)
Power 
Pack 
Cost 
(Cr.) Notes
Flesh 
Disintegrator
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
Special No — 150 5 175,000 3,000 Dex 8+ or 
Survival 8+ 
roll or be 
automatically 
slain
Heavy Duty 
Disintegrator
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
Special No — 9 16 35,000 3,000 Dex 8+ or 
Survival 8+ 
roll or be 
automatically 
slain
Heavy Laser, Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
10d6 4 — 30 50 18,000 3,000
Las-Burner Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
8d6 No — 18 10 3,200 3,000
Lazooka, 
General 
Arms Laser 
Destroyer Mk III
Ranged 
(rocket)
16d6 No 1 13 1 14,000 3,000
Missile 
Launcher, 
Mauley H/HE 
‘Snub-Nose’
Ranged 
(rocket)
By Missile No 0 10 1 7,000 —
Sonic Cannon, 
Hondai 
Ultrasound
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
3d6 No — 125 40 78,000 3,000


===PAGE 122===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 123===
 Megways and Skedways
122
The roads of Mega-City One are therefore incredibly complex 
and extremely dangerous. Navigating the complexities of the 
city is impossible without GPS navigation, something that is 
ﬁ tted as standard on every road-going vehicle, along with 
reliable autopilot and autodrive systems which help keep 
road trafﬁ c accidents to a minimum. Every Judge has, as 
part of his regular shift pattern, a stint of Road Trafﬁ c Detail, 
cruising the road systems and watching for traf ﬁ c violations 
and other crimes, such as mopad piracy and car jacking. 
Even Judges, with their intensive training, need to rely on 
their bike computer to reliably navigate around Mega-City 
One although each Judge can be expected to know the road 
systems for his own sector without needing to consult his 
nav computer every few minutes.
Guide to 
Mega-City 
One Transit 
Systems
The different forms of roadways and pedestrian access 
ways are bewildering: this section de ﬁ nes the different 
transportation options available in Mega-City One.
Back Street
Two-way passages, usually no wider than two metres, Back 
Streets are found in the oldest and often most neglected, 
areas of the city – typically in Old Town (old central New 
York) and City Bottom. Back Streets are notorious gang-
haunts, rat-runs for muggers and scum of more violent 
varieties and generally far away from the general attention 
of the Judges. Periodic clean-up details of a sector’s back 
streets see Judges descend, in teams, into City Bottom and 
the old areas to clean-up and clear-out the perp dross that 
accumulates there. These Back Street Blitzes are one of the 
few mass-Judge lightning raids that citizens openly welcome 
and sometimes petition for, because, for a while at least, the 
Back Streets become safe again for decent citizens (many 
of whom cannot afford to live anywhere else).
 Boomway
A one- or two-way, multi-level megway (between four to 
ten lanes wide and two to four levels high) that cross a 
wide expanse between major megways. Boomways are 
equipped with high-side walls and rails to prevent vehicles 
from tumbling off the road and plummeting anything up to 
a mile down. To ensure that accidents are minimised the 
Boomways are under constant surveillance by Sector 
House trafﬁ c control and are equipped with multiple sensor 
and vehicle automated override systems to prevent barrier 
ruptures.
 BroadWay
Any large pedestrian plaza, typically found between City 
Blocks. Broadways are usually busy with pedestrian traf ﬁ c 
at all hours (vehicles are banned from crossing Broadways 
– save for Judges needing to use them as thoroughfares if 
in legitimate pursuit) and often home to street-vendors and 
opportunist perps such as taps.
Crossway/Crosslink
Any pedway intersection (see Pedway on the following page).
 Eeziglide
A one-way, conveyor system for pedestrians. Eeziglides 
convey foot traf ﬁ c at a steady 5km per hour over, under 
and around broadways, pedways and crossways. Vocalised 
warnings keep pedestrians informed about Eeziglide rules: 
no running, no walking or running in the opposite direction, 
advanced noti ﬁ cation of an Eezliglide’s termination point, 
and a stream of advertisement for services, shops and 
businesses located near to the Eezliglide’s embarkation and 
disembarkation points.
Filter
A one-way exit or entrance to and from parking areas.
Flyover/Overzoom
A skedway that passes over a City Block, with connections 
and ﬁ lter lanes into a block itself. By their nature, Flyovers 
and Overzooms are amongst the highest roadways in Mega-
City One and therefore subject to the same automated safety 
features as Boomways.
Inter-Block Zoom
Mega-City One’s elevated, enclosed, maglev train-system 
which replaced the old Sky-Rail network in the late Twenty-
ﬁ rst Century. Interblock Zooms provide a link between all the 
city blocks in any given sector. During a Block War, Sector 
House trafﬁ c control immediately locks-down all Inter-Block 
Zoom transit capsules to prevent them from carrying either 
assailants or bombs into enemy blocks. Riding the Inter-Block 
Zoom costs Cr. 1 per trip or Cr. 5 for ten trips, if purchased 
in advance from the automated/robot ticket vendors in the 
Inter-Block Zoom interchange Broad-Ways.
Intersect
Any junction between a pedway,megway, skedway or other 
form of trafﬁ c conduit.
Judge’s Lane
A two-way road that runs parallel to major roadways and 
reserved for Justice Department usage. Observation ramps 
provide convenient parking for Lawmaster-mounted Judges 

===PAGE 124===
 Megways and Skedways
123
on trafﬁ  c detail, along with strategically located speed 
cameras to monitor both speedsters and slowsters. Judge’s 
Lanes are used by all Justice Department vehicles, from 
Lawmasters to Pat-Wagons and it is an offence (up to 1 
year in the cubes) for unauthorised vehicles to use them. 
Obs-Ramps are stationed every 5 kilometres along a stretch 
of road and are positioned reasonably high up to afford 
excellent visibility.
Median Strip
The central reservation running between two directions 
of roadway. Protective barriers line the Median Strip, 
preventing accidents in one half of a road spilling into the 
other. Most Median Strips are between 2 and 8 metres in 
width, depending on the type of roadway and number of 
lanes present on each side. Wider, faster megways have 
wider Median Strips. Information boards posted at regular 
intervals along the Median Strip offer traf ﬁ c information, a 
constant stream of advertisements and Justice Department 
reminders of the penalties for common traf ﬁ c violations 
(‘Speed Up! Or Slow Right Down to A Year in the 
Cubes!’).
Mega Circular
These bi-directional, six-lane megways bypass downtown 
sector trafﬁ c to join together major megways. The Mega 
Circulars are typically very fast and very congested stretches 
of road: vehicles tend to average speeds of 300kph or faster 
and the constant ﬂ ow of trafﬁ c across and through Mega-
City One means that the Mega Circulars are never quiet. It 
is the joining of North and South Mega Circulars that form 
the notorious Devil’s Island, a special prison completely 
surrounded by thundering traf ﬁ c, used by the Judges for 
punishing criminals who are deemed too dangerous even 
for the iso-cubes.
 MegWay
Megways are the largest road format in Mega-City One. 
Bi-directional and between four and twenty lanes wide, the 
megways run both across and up through Mega-City One 
for its whole breadth and length. Megway is the general term 
for these major, multi-lane highways and where a megway 
passes through a particular sector it may be given a local 
name that allows for easier differentiation and re ﬂ ects the 
original roadways that the megway replaced. Thus, a stretch 
of megway might be known as megway 10 in general but as 
the Sarah Palin X-Pressway where it passes through Sector 
21 and around the Sarah Palin City Block.
 Parkarama
Ground vehicle parks, usually many stories high and fully 
automated: a citizen drives his vehicle into a loading bay 
and robotic systems take the car to a free bay and stores 
it until the citizen comes to collect it. Parkaramas can hold 
thousands of vehicles in a variety of sizes from personal 
transport buggies up to mopads (although it is rare for a 
mopad to ever actually park-up) and parking charges are 
generally pricey (anything from Cr. 10 per hour through to 
Cr. 100 at peak times). Some parkaramas are still of the DIY 
variety where the driver has to cruise around the labyrinthine 
parking bays hunting for a parking space. Such manual 
parkaramas, usually in the poorer districts of a sector, are 
prime areas for taps and car jackers, who lurk in the shadows 
waiting for an easy mark or a desired vehicle, and then 
strike, relatively con ﬁ dent that they can escape with their 
crime. Some of the manual parkaramas are so large and so 
maze-like that it is not uncommon for citizens to get lost for 
hours or days at a time, racking up parking charges whilst 
trying to ﬁ nd a space, a parked car or simply just the way out. 
As the manual parkaramas are often privately owned, and 
owned by criminal gangs in some cases, they are a way of 
making easy money from unwary motorists who simply want 
somewhere safe to leave their car and do a little shopping. 
The costs of using them – both in terms of legitimate fees 
and the risks of being mugged or having one’s car stolen 
– make such shopping trips hideously expensive.
 Pedway
Pedestrian-only walkway found right across Mega-City One 
and at all levels of the city’s buildings. Pedways close to 
ground level are open to the elements but raised pedways – 
those hundreds of metres above street level – are enclosed 
either by high-sided, transparent plastisteel walls or full 
plastistell tubes. Subpeds are enclosed pedways that run 
under main pedways and beneath roads and buildings.
Podport
Hover vehicle parks; similar to parkaramas but designed for 
vehicles using hovercraft technology or antigrav units.
Skedway
Single direction highways of between one and ﬁ ve lanes. 
Interskeds, or feedways, connect one skedway to another. 
Underskeds are single-lane roads, often reserved for public 
service trafﬁ c, that pass underneath skeds. Overskeds are 
similar but pass above the skedways.
Sky-Rail
The now obsolete monorail public transit-system introduced 
in the early 21st century. One third of Mega-City One still uses 
the Sky-Rail network pending upgrades to the zoom-system. 
Sky-Rail uses a conventional, single track with electrically 
powered, remote-operated or robot piloted cars. The largest 
Sky-Rail intersection in the City is Hell’s Junction.

===PAGE 125===
 Megways and Skedways
124


===PAGE 126===
 Megways and Skedways
125
 Slipzoom
Found at larger interchanges, Slipzooms are one-way 
on/off ramps of between one to four lanes, used for larger 
interchanges. An underzoom (also known as a ﬂ yunder) is 
a single-lane road reserved for public service trafﬁ c passing 
under a Slipzoom.
 Superslab
The longest megway in Mega-City One, bisecting the city 
from north to south. The Superslab is twenty-four lanes, 1,220 
kilometres of poured plastisteel and ferrocrete that runs in 
a straight line through the city but undulates between City 
Bottom and the higher regions of City Blocks and is joined by 
hundreds of skedways, mega circulars and boomways, laced 
into the infrastructure by slipzooms and underzooms. The 
Superslab tunnels under the immense buildings of the city in 
many places, including the infamous Fox Tunnel, scene of the 
climax of Supersurf 7 and shot, backwards, by Chopper (AKA 
Marlon Shakespeare, the Midnight Surfer) in his daring bid to 
win the world Skysurf championship. The Superslab never 
sleeps, never stops, with trafﬁ c thundering along it morning, 
noon and night. Buildings close to it are specially strengthened 
and noise-insulated to cope with the incessant roar of the 
twenty-four hour trafﬁ c but this does not prevent the Superslab 
from driving some citizens to distraction. ‘Slab-happy’ is the 
term given to those who derive some form of comfort and 
peace from the proximity of the Superslab, whether that is 
living on it (in a mopad) or near it; Justice Department Med 
Centre studies have found that the noise and vibration of the 
Superslab has a kind of hypnotic effect on many citizens and, 
when removed from its environs, they become anxious and 
prone to panic attacks, unable to cope without the constant 
background roar of the immense highway.
 Wayby
Small parking zones set aside along megways and skedways 
at regular intervals where drivers can pull-off and temporarily 
park their vehicles. Waybys tend to be crowded round the 
clock; both by parked vehicles and cheap roadside cafes 
selling poor-quality munce products and beverages.
 Zipstrip
One or two-way pedestrian walkways linking City Blocks, 
sectors and smaller interchanges. Enclosed zipstrips, 
whether elevated or not, are called Pipeways.
 Zoomtube
The most recent traf ﬁ c innovation in Mega-City One. A 
zoomtube is a fully enclosed road-system where all traf ﬁ c 
is fully computer-controlled for optimum speed and driver-
safety. Only vehicles ﬁ tted with Zoomtube compatible 
control overrides are permitted to ride the Zoomtubes. 
These electronic control management systems plug into 
the vehicle’s powerplant and hand all control of the vehicle 
over to the pre-programmed Zoomtube system. Vehicle 
speed, proximity, lane occupancy, and so on, is constantly 
monitored and adjusted to keep traf ﬁ c moving at a steady 
180kph (faster, when and where permissible) and to regulate 
the volume of traf ﬁ c entering and leaving the Zoomtube. 
Emergency vehicles and Lawmasters are, naturally, exempt 
from Zoomtube Control – and just as well, because, for 
all the failsafe mechanisms and integrity of the Zoomtube 
computer infrastructure, they are not infallible. Even minute 
discrepancies in control procedures could result in a vast and 
catastrophic pile-up, especially where Zoomtubes intersect 
with megways and, especially, the Superslab.
 Vehicles
Fossil fuels, as the main source of fuel for vehicles, were 
generally replaced by cheap, ef ﬁ cient hydrogen fuel cells 
and bio-diesel hybrids in the early decades of the 21
st 
Century. Further developments introduced fusion-powered 
engines and now almost all Mega-City One vehicles are 
relatively quiet, non-polluting and highly energy ef ﬁ cient. A 
fad still remains for the petrol-burners of way-back-when 
with antique car collectors paying huge sums for even the 
rustiest, most clapped-out relic from the pre-war days.
The vehicles featured below are described in the following 
terms:
Speed Limits for Mega-City One Highways
Some Mega-City One highways have a minimum speed limit for vehicles; drivers using these highways that drive beneath the 
minimum speed limit (‘Slowsters’) are liable for arrest.
Highway Type Minimum Speed Maximum Speed
Megway/Mega Circular 120kph 500kph
Skedway/Flyover/Overzoom — 250kph
Superslab 200kph 500kph
Zoomtube — 180kph

===PAGE 127===
 Megways and Skedways
126
Dimensions
Height: The vehicle’s height in millimetres, centimetres or 
metres (for larger vehicles).
Width: The vehicle’s width, measured at its widest point, in 
millimetres, centimetres or metres (for large vehicles).
Length: The vehicle’s length, from nose to tail in 
millimetres, centimetres or metres (for larger vehicles).
Wheelbase: The width of the vehicle’s wheelbase in 
millimetres, centimetres or metres (for larger vehicles).
Weight: The vehicle’s weight in kilograms (or tons, for 
larger vehicles).
Fuel Capacity: How much fuel, in litres, the vehicle can 
carry.
Powerplant: The make and type of the vehicle’s engine/
powerplant.
Full Speed: The maximum speed, in kilometres per hour, 
the vehicle can attain.
Max Speed: The vehicle’s maximum speed in metres per 
Combat Round.
Acceleration: The vehicle’s rate of acceleration in metres 
per Combat Round.
Deceleration: The vehicle’s rate of deceleration in metres 
per Combat Round.
Cost: In Credits.
Statistics
Skill: What skill is required to drive or use the vehicle.
Agility: How easy the vehicle is to drive, expressed as a 
DM to the driver’s skill check.
Crew: How many passengers, including the driver, the 
vehicle can carry.
Open/Closed: If the vehicle is open or closed (see 
Traveller Core Rulebook, page 66).
Armour: How much armour, if any, the vehicle has (see 
Traveller Core Rulebook, page 66).
Hull/Structure: The number of hits the vehicle can 
sustain before being disabled.
Cargo: The amount of cargo that can be carried, in 
kilograms.
Weapons: On the rare occasions where a vehicle is 
armed, what armaments it carries.
The statistics entries relate to the standard vehicle handling 
rules found on page 103 of the Traveller Core Rulebook. 
Any additional information about a vehicle’s handling or 
performance is given in the description.
Block Buggy
A common feature of every modern city block, very few block buggies are owned by citizens but are instead the property of the city. Given the 
sheer size of most city blocks, even the most able-bodied citizen may have trouble traversing the length of even a single ﬂ oor, and so simple, 
easy to use block buggies are supplied for the use of the inhabitants in order to safely take them from park, to mall, to home again without 
fuss. The buggy is powered by a standard, rechargeable, Hi-Lux battery which gives an operating time of 8 hours between charges. It can 
comfortably accommodate a single passenger and up to 100kg of additional cargo – although, when fully laden, its range drops to 6 hours of 
battery life and its speed halves. The buggy is reasonably agile and the driver gains a +1 DM to his Drive skill when using the vehicle.
Dimensions
Height 1,700mm
Width 800mm
Length 2,000mm
Wheelbase 790mm
Weight 200kg
Fuel Capacity 6-8 hours running time on a full charge
Powerplant Fnord Autosystems Hi-Lux battery (hydrogen) 
Full Speed 100 kph
Max Speed 166m per round
Acceleration 44m per round
Deceleration 50m per round
Cost Cr. 6,500
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +1
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour —
Hull/Structure 1/1
Cargo 100kg
Weapons —

===PAGE 128===
 Megways and Skedways
127
Citi-Def Gunship, Sirocco
Slowly being phased out in favour of less manoeuvrable ground-based vehicles, due to a number of Block Wars where its 
armaments caused large numbers of casualties, many Citi-Def units cling hopelessly to their prized Sirocco gunships. Fast, well 
armed and armoured, the gunship is the perfect vehicle for destroying light targets and transporting small squads whilst under 
heavy ﬁ re. Unfortunately, it is these same qualities that have made it lethal during Block Wars, rather than in the defence of the 
city as was originally intended.
The gunship is powered by the Kyrix neutro-grav, anti-gravity power unit of a kind similar to Justice Department H Wagons. The 
Sirocco is the most common gunship variant found amongst Citi-Def crews but other variants have similar characteristics.
Dimensions
Height 2,100mm
Width 3,500mm
Length 8,300mm
Wheelbase —
Weight 60,000kg
Fuel Capacity 1,800 litres
Powerplant Kyrix neutron-grav anti-gravity propulsion unit
Full Speed 600kph
Max Speed 1,000m per round
Acceleration 112m per round
Deceleration 130m per round
Cost MCr. 3
Statistics
Skill Flyer (grav)
Agility +0
Crew 10 (pilot and gunner, plus up to 8 passengers)
Open/Closed Open
Armour 20
Hull/Structure 8
Cargo 1,000kg
Weapons 2 x Heavy Spitgun, 2x (linked) Hi-Ex Missile Launchers
Ground Car, Foord Slabster
The Slabster is one of the most common vehicles found on the streets of Mega-City One and every family who cannot hope to 
afford the latest roadster or hovercar aspires to the freedom a ground car can give – for many, the car gives the ﬁ rst opportunity 
they have had to leave their city block. The Slabster is reasonably well-featured for its price and includes many additions such 
as the Electro ‘Lite’ security system normally found on far more expensive models. Many are used by the few successful taxi 
companies still employing human drivers. 
Dimensions
Height 580mm
Width 710mm
Length 1,980mm
Wheelbase 1,093mm
Weight 1,574kg
Fuel Capacity 91 litres
Powerplant Foord catalytic 2.5 hybrid fuel cell
Full Speed 230kph
Max Speed 383m per round

===PAGE 129===
 Megways and Skedways
128
Acceleration 44m per round
Deceleration 50m per round
Cost Cr. 4,500
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +0
Crew 5 (driver and 4 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 6
Hull/Structure 3/2
Cargo 325kg
Weapons None
Dimensions

===PAGE 130===
 Megways and Skedways
129
Ground Car, Foord Strato
For many critics, Foord’s entry into the roadster market was an expensive disaster but by just slightly altering the marketing of 
the Strato, the company managed to create a highly desirable ground car for the citizen who wanted the looks and performance 
of a hot rod but without the expense and prestige. Forever dubbed ‘the poor citizen’s roadster,’ the Strato can never compete 
with Nirvana’s Type-Z in terms of style, features and sheer appeal but it has proved itself to have a performance best described 
as sparkling, combined with Foord’s legendary reliability. 
Dimensions
Height 1,340mm
Width 1,775mm
Length 4,430mm
Wheelbase 2,370mm
Weight 1,300kg
Fuel Capacity 100 litres
Powerplant Foord Optimax V12 super hybrid
Full Speed 350kph
Max Speed 583m per round
Acceleration 64m per round
Deceleration 56m per round
Cost Cr. 19,250
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +0
Crew 2 (1 driver, 1 passenger)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 6
Hull/Structure 3/3
Cargo 160kg
Weapons None
Ground Car, Oostin Macro
A common sight on the streets of Mega-City One (as are similar, two-seater micro cars), the Oostin Macro is a cheap, two-door 
ground car light on luxury but noted for its long-lived reliability. The Macro has earned the distinction of being the car most young 
citizens aim to purchase as their ﬁ rst ground car due to its low selling price and there is a growing city-wide Oostin Drivers Fan 
Club to support this otherwise unremarkable vehicle. Many members make extensive modi ﬁ cations to their Macro, aiming to 
maintain some individuality amongst the millions of ground cars on the roads. 
Dimensions
Height 1,407
Width 1,683
Length 3,700mm
Wheelbase 2,470mm
Weight 1,140kg
Fuel Capacity 40 litres
Powerplant Oostin Economy 7 hybrid 1.8
Full Speed 217km
Max Speed 361m per round
Acceleration 40m per round
Deceleration 46m per round
Cost Cr. 3,750

===PAGE 131===
 Megways and Skedways
130
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +0
Crew 2 (1 driver, 1 passenger)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 3
Hull/Structure 2/2
Cargo 227kg
Weapons None
Hoverbus
A perpetual sight in the skies of Mega-City One, for those citizens unable to afford their own vehicle, the hoverbus often provides 
the most convenient way to move across a city sector. Built for capacity, rather than comfort, hoverbus companies often cram 
another 20 passengers into the ‘standing space,’ though all but the most will be careful not to exceed this legal limit. 
Dimensions
Height 3,755mm
Width 2,490mm
Length 15 metres
Wheelbase —
Weight 13,450kg
Fuel Capacity 400 litres
Powerplant Kummins 665 Transit-class grav unit (8 litre)
Full Speed 150kph
Max Speed 250m per round
Acceleration 28m per round
Deceleration 34m per round
Cost Cr. 180,000
Statistics
Skill Flyer (grav)
Agility –1
Crew 51 (1 pilot, plus 50 passengers, although up to 70 passengers may be carried, 
using standing room)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 6
Hull/Structure 3/4
Cargo 4,050kg
Weapons None

===PAGE 132===
 Megways and Skedways
131
Hovercar, Foord Falcon Giah
Wealthier families often choose a hover car such as the Falcon, leaving the crowded streets far below and travelling at great 
speed to any destination in the city. Many critics have noted that the Falcon has a very basic and even ‘cheap’ feel to it 
compared to the credits needed to purchase one but it should never be forgotten that the anti-grav powerplant that provides the 
hovercar with so much of its ﬂ exibility accounts for the greater cost.
Dimensions
Height 1,473mm
Width 2,187mm
Length 5,080mm
Wheelbase 3,035mm
Weight 1,985kg
Fuel Capacity 90 litres
Powerplant Foord Z-Tek 8000 grav unit
Full Speed 400kph
Max Speed 666m per round
Acceleration 74m per round
Deceleration 88m per round
Cost Cr. 18,000
Statistics
Skill Flyer (grav)
Agility +0
Crew 5 (1 pilot, 4 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 6
Hull/Structure 2/2
Cargo 230kg
Weapons None

===PAGE 133===
 Megways and Skedways
132
Hoverpod, Mercury Nine-Ten
Often regarded as a ﬂ ying buggy, hoverpods meet with little of the same derision, no doubt due to their expense. Though quite 
comfortable, the Nine-Ten is little more than an enclosed seat inside a bubble, strapped on to an anti-grav powerplant that all but 
strains to get a single occupant aloft. However, for sheer convenience, there are few modes of transport that can travel across 
an entire sector and yet still ﬁ nd enough space to land in the most crowded hoverport. 
Dimensions
Height 1,400mm
Width 800mm
Length 2,130mm
Wheelbase —
Weight 199 kg
Fuel Capacity 12 litres
Powerplant Mikrodyne Omnilift 10 grav unit
Full Speed 120 kph
Max Speed 200m per round
Acceleration 24m per round
Deceleration 28m per round
Cost Cr. 9,000
Statistics
Skill Flyer (grav)
Agility –1
Crew 1
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 2
Hull/Structure 1/1
Cargo 25kg
Weapons None
Jet Pack, Kohinsayer Greasy Lightning
A potentially lethal device for its owner, the jet pack is a simple, high-powered rocket engine strapped to the back of a citizen to 
permit ﬂ ight and fast movement. The Kohinsayer is a budget model that cannot lift a citizen who weighs more than 100kg though 
it remains surprisingly reliable in operation. The jet pack itself weighs 4kg. The pack has a maximum range of 300km.
Dimensions
Height —
Width 600mm
Length 1,000mm
Wheelbase —
Weight 4kg
Fuel Capacity 10 litres
Powerplant Kohinsayer PFS VX5 Lifter control unit
Full Speed 250kph

===PAGE 134===
 Megways and Skedways
133
Max Speed 416 per round
Acceleration 44m per round
Deceleration 52m per round
Cost Cr. 2,000
Statistics
Skill Flyer (personal)
Agility –2
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour —
Hull/Structure 1/1
Cargo —
Weapons None
Jugger, JCD 939
Often nicknamed the two-laner, for the amount of space it takes up on the megway, the 939 is a work horse of the large 
corporations, ferrying raw materials and ﬁ nished goods from sector to sector, forming the vital backbone of commerce in Mega-
City One. Boasting a tremendous increase in cargo capacity over JCD’s previous model, the 838, it is still able to maintain a 
top speed allowing it to take to the megway, the only roads in the city capable of bearing these monstrosities without judicial  
supervision. 
Dimensions
Height 3,556mm
Width 4,830mm
Length 20 metres
Wheelbase 6,600mm
Weight 36,000kg
Fuel Capacity 360 litres
Powerplant JCD Megway 500kW Hybrid
Full Speed 205kph
Max Speed 341m per round
Acceleration 38m per round
Deceleration 44m per round
Cost Cr. 125,000
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility –2
Crew 3 (1 driver, 2 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 6
Hull/Structure 4/6
Cargo 30 tons
Weapons None
Dimensions

===PAGE 135===
 Megways and Skedways
134
Merchant Hovership, ‘Green Lady’
Almost without exception, every hovership is owned by one of the large mercantile corporations that trades regularly between 
Brit-Cit and Mega-City One, with occasional forays to other cities of the world. However, the Justice Department is known to own 
a couple of reﬁ tted hoverships and a few billionaires of the city have taken the time to convert older hoverships into immense 
luxury yachts. The Green Lady is typical of many hoverships, being able to glide above the surface of the Black Atlantic or sail 
as a conventional vessel when forced down by oncoming storms. With a cavernous hold and a licensed heavy laser mount to 
ward off the larger creatures of the Black Atlantic, such hoverships form the centre of trade with Brit-Cit. 
Dimensions
Height 26 metres
Width 30 metres
Length 80 metres
Wheelbase —
Weight 1,090 tons
Fuel Capacity 10 tons
Powerplant Quad Suskind Hydrogen Fuel Cell Generators (24,000kW combined output)
Full Speed 75kph (40knots)
Max Speed 125m per round
Acceleration 14m per round
Deceleration 20m per round
Cost MCr. 18.5
Statistics
Skill Pilot (Hoverships)
Agility –1
Crew 47 (plus berths for 50 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 12
Hull/Structure 8/12
Cargo 2,000,000 tons
Weapons Heavy Laser
Mo-Pad, General DT-10 Humber
Mo-pads are permanently mobile habitation units, perpetually cruising the megways and skeds, their occupants itinerant citizens 
who rarely pause in their movement save for vital refuelling provision stops at the vast, mobile service units that also ply th e 
highways. Citizens forego the comfortable, static life of the city block in favour of independence and an opportunity to see more 
of Mega-City One than most citizens will realise.
Mo-pads carry all mod-cons: a living/dining/galley area, bedrooms, showering facilities, entertainment units and a spacious cab. 
Using the mobile services that ply the meg-lanes, there is no need for a mo-pad citizen to set foot on static ground.
The DT-10 Humber is a prime example of an older mo-pad found on the Mega-City One highways. It gives a lot to newer models 
in terms of size and comfort, though it is still able to keep up to the minimum speed limits on the megway, where most examples 
spend their entire working lives. The interior can be described as basic and the autopilot is notoriously unreliable in emergency 
situations, forcing drivers to at least be present in the cramped cockpit at all times. However, owners tend to scrape and save  
every credit they can ﬁ nd in order to upgrade the autopilot and better equip the living quarters.

===PAGE 136===
 Megways and Skedways
135
Dimensions
Height 4 metres
Width 3.5 metres
Length 7.45 metres
Wheelbase 4,318mm
Weight 29,918kg
Fuel Capacity 200 litres
Powerplant DT Systems Endurance H-Cell Hybrid
Full Speed 220kph
Max Speed 366m per round
Acceleration 40m per round
Deceleration 48m per round
Cost Cr. 26,000
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility –1
Crew 6 (1 driver plus 5 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 8
Hull/Structure 4/4
Cargo 1 ton
Weapons None
Mo-Pad, Mercury Royale
Mercury’s entry into the lucrative mo-pad market was to be in a blaze of glory and, in truth, they created a vehicle which had 
few equals on the megways of the city. A truly immense vehicle, the Royale had every feature and luxurious extra that could be 
squeezed into its giant hull, including a full swimming pool, enclosed roof garden and wall-spanning Tri-D screens. There was 
truly no better way to travel in Mega-City One. Unfortunately, citizens forced on to the roads of the city were rarely in a position 
to lay out the credits for such a mo-pad and so very few were ever sold. The Royale is an incredibly expensive mo-pad, due to 
Mercury’s constant price changes designed to recoup development costs and so has become a status symbol of sorts in high 
society, purchased by citizens and corporations that like to create an impression during business negotiations 
Dimensions
Height 4.8 metres
Width 6 metres
Length 20 metres
Wheelbase 8,500mm
Weight 66,000kg
Fuel Capacity 500 litres
Powerplant Mikrodyne Monamyics Fusion Plant
Full Speed 235kph
Max Speed 391 per round
Acceleration 44m per round
Deceleration 52m per round
Cost MCr. 4.5

===PAGE 137===
 Megways and Skedways
136
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility –2
Crew 12 (1 driver plus 11 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 8
Hull/Structure 8/8
Cargo 8 tons
Weapons None
Powerboard, Chowder Boards McKenzie Extreme
Seen by many juves as the ultimate sport, powerboards are a craze that sweeps through Mega-City One every few years. 
Taking the form of a jet-powered, ﬂ ying surfboard, powerboards were made famous by Supersurf champion Chopper. A simple 
throttle is operated by the rear foot of a powerboarder who uses the weight of his body to guide the machine through any 
manoeuvre. When the inevitable happens and the user falls from his powerboard, it immediately halts in mid-air, keeping the 
user safe from harm as he dangles from a safety line attached to one of his ankles. Cheap and easy to maintain, the McKenzie 
Extreme is one of the most popular powerboards in the world, though it lacks the top end speed of later models. 


===PAGE 138===
 Megways and Skedways
137
Dimensions
Height 55mm
Width 559mm
Length 1,833mm
Wheelbase —
Weight 59kg
Fuel Capacity —
Powerplant Fuziontek Super-X Lithium/Hydrogen fuel cell (endurance 100 hours between 
charges)
Full Speed 175kph
Max Speed 291 metres per round
Acceleration 70 metres per round
Deceleration 102 metres per round
Cost Cr. 4,000
Statistics
Skill Flyer (personal)
Agility +0
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour —
Hull/Structure 1/1
Weapons —
Powerboard, Hensi Co. Yakamoto 3000z
Made by Hensi Co. of Hondo City, the Yakamoto 3000z is arguably the fastest and sleekest powerboard credits can buy. With 
an incredible top speed and licensed Krapasaki gravitic stabilising ﬁ ns, there is little else a Supersurf champion will use in his 
sport.
Dimensions
Height 57mm
Width 559mm
Length 1,841mm
Wheelbase —
Weight 59kg
Fuel Capacity —
Powerplant Hensi Ono-Sensei Neutrilium battery cell (endurance 150 hours between 
charges)
Full Speed 250kph
Max Speed 416 metres per round
Acceleration 84 metres per round
Deceleration 106 metres per round
Cost Cr. 9,000
Statistics
Skill Flyer (personal)
Agility +1
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour —
Hull/Structure 1/1
Weapons —

===PAGE 139===
 Megways and Skedways
138
Powerboard, Stigcorps Hurricane X1
The Hurricane X1 powerboard has added plating to make it far more resilient to rough impacts and gunshots and even 
incorporates a tiny cargo hold in which a skysurfer can store small amounts of provisions or spares for longer journeys. It retains 
its sleek and fast performance, however, through the use of expensive but powerful Stigcorps A3 thrusters which grants the 
powerboard its competitive edge despite its increased weight.
Dimensions
Height 57mm
Width 559mm
Length 1,836mm
Wheelbase —
Weight 63kg
Fuel Capacity —
Powerplant Stigcorps A3 thrusters (endurance 120 hours between charges)
Full Speed 235kph
Max Speed 391 metres per round
Acceleration 80 metres per round
Deceleration 94 metres per round
Cost Cr. 7,500
Statistics
Skill Flyer (personal)
Agility +0
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour 2
Hull/Structure 1/1
Cargo 3kg
Weapons —

===PAGE 140===
 Megways and Skedways
139
Road Buggy, Mercury Type 102
Considered a lethal contraption by all but its most loyal owners the Type 102 is still present on many of the roads of Mega-City 
One due to its inherent cheapness. The proud owner of this road buggy enjoys few thrills with its skimping of internal features  
and the lacklustre performance means it cannot even legally drive on the megways of the city. However, those citizens who 
have such vehicles can rarely afford to travel far anyway, though they must always keep a sharp eye out even on city bottom, 
for larger vehicles have been known to crush the Type 102 without their drivers even knowing the buggy was there. 
Dimensions
Height 1,542mm
Width 1,557mm
Length 2,690mm
Wheelbase 1,867mm
Weight 750kg
Fuel Capacity 35 litres
Powerplant GoGreen Bio-diesel/hybrid, 1.1 litre
Full Speed 110kph
Max Speed 183m per round
Acceleration 22m per round
Deceleration 26m per round
Cost Cr. 2,250
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +0
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour —
Hull/Structure 1/1
Cargo 50kg
Weapons —
Roadster, Nirvana BKJ3000 Type-Z
Every young juve with but a passing interest in vehicles is likely to have the latest vid slug of a Type-Z being put through it s 
paces on a crowded megway, for this is the car to own in Mega-City One. Though it gives a lot away in speed to the fastest 
hovercars, it is a well-known fact that a true adrenaline rush can only come from high speed driving through the ground traf ﬁ c 
of Mega-City One. With gorgeous, sleek looks and beneﬁ ting from a highly-tuned engine, there are few vehicles with the sheer 
class of the Type-Z. A fairly rare sight on the streets of Mega-City One, the purr of the powerplant guarantees much head-
turning as the roadster sails past, which is likely the intention of its wealthy owner. 
Dimensions
Height 1,125mm
Width 1,870mm
Length 4,142mm
Wheelbase 2,500mm
Weight 690kg
Fuel Capacity 60 litres
Powerplant Evox V12 24-valve
Full Speed 475kph
Max Speed 791 metres per round

===PAGE 141===
 Megways and Skedways
140
Acceleration 88 metres per round
Deceleration 104 metres per round
Cost Cr. 28,000
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +0
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour 4
Hull/Structure 3/3
Cargo 100kg
Weapons None
Sky Truk, Mercury-Karmack
Built to allow businesses to avoid the inconvenience of the eternal trafﬁ c jams of the city, the Sky Truk also grants an exponential 
increase in the speed in which it can deliver its cargo, thanks to the powerful Karmack A2 anti-grav powerplant. Few smaller 
businesses can justify the increase in price needed to take to the skies of Mega-City One, though those that take the gamble 
often succeed where their competitors fail 
Dimensions
Height 4 metres
Width 4.5 metres
Length 8.45 metres
Wheelbase —
Weight 32,000kg
Fuel Capacity 300 litres
Powerplant Karmack A2 anti-grav powerplant
Full Speed 400kph
Max Speed 666m per round
Acceleration 74m per round
Deceleration 80m per round
Cost Cr. 31,000
Statistics
Skill Flyer (grav)
Agility +0
Crew 3 (1 driver plus 2 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 8
Hull/Structure 4/4
Cargo 6 tons
Weapons —
Dimensions

===PAGE 142===
 Megways and Skedways
141
Strato-Cruiser, Turbine-X
Seen only in the giant spaceports of Mega-City One, strato-cruisers skim the very edge of the world’s atmosphere to avoid 
the radiation belts cloaking areas such as the Cursed Earth, to deliver their high-paying passengers to any major city within 
a few short hours. Every strato-cruiser is a sleek, highly-aerodynamic vehicle designed to attain great speeds whilst granting 
occupants absolute safety and a modicum of luxury. 
Dimensions
Height 8.5 metres
Width 3 metres (fuselage); 25.6 metres wingspan
Length 62 metres
Wheelbase —
Weight 185,000kg
Fuel Capacity 120,000 litres
Powerplant Olympiad Systems 595 Strato-X thrust 
Full Speed 3,258 kph (MACH 3)
Max Speed 5,430m per round
Acceleration 608m per round
Deceleration 716m per round
Cost MCr. 24
Statistics
Skill Flyer (winged)
Agility +0
Crew 3 (capacity for 84 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 10
Hull/Structure 8/8
Cargo 8 tons
Weapons —

===PAGE 143===
 Megways and Skedways
142
Street Bike, Krapasaki TD-4
The dream of many young juves, the Krapasaki is known for being a cheap, no-frills bike designed only for thrilling speeds. 
Despite many Lightweight measures taken, the Notron 2000cc v4 powerplant cannot hope to match the raw output of the Otomo 
or Lawmaster but as a cheap alternative for the young, it has proved a good seller for Krapasaki. 
Dimensions
Height 830mm
Width 900mm
Length 2,000mm
Wheelbase 1,400mm
Weight 176kg
Fuel Capacity 18 litres
Powerplant Notron 2000cc v4
Full Speed 300kph
Max Speed 500m per round
Acceleration 56m per round
Deceleration 66m per round
Cost Cr. 1,800
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +0

===PAGE 144===
 Megways and Skedways
143
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour —
Hull/Structure 1/1
Cargo 10kg
Weapons —
Street Bike, Otomo K-9000
One of the fastest bikes available in Mega-City One, the K-9000 is capable of matching even the Judge’s Lawmaster Mk III 
for sheer speed and handling. It does, of course, lack the armour and weaponry that make the Lawmaster so lethal and also 
gives a lot to advanced computer control systems. Its sleek fairings are designed for pure speed and even in a city jaded with 
the appearance of yet another ‘latest thing,’ it is clear that Otomo have another winner on their hands, provided their wealthi er 
clientele can be convinced to hand over the credits. 
Dimensions
Height 1,144mm
Width 915mm
Length 2,015mm
Wheelbase 1,400mm
Weight 150kg
Fuel Capacity 55 litres
Powerplant Notron V8, 4000cc, ASB Quad Carbs
Full Speed 570kph
Max Speed 950m/round
Acceleration 158m/round
Deceleration 236m/round
Cost Cr. 22,000
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +1
Crew 1
Open/Closed Open
Armour 3
Hull/Structure 2/2
Cargo 20kg
Weapons None
Roadliner, Roadliners Inc. ‘Fat Boy’
Running alongside the much larger juggers, the Roadliner is a vehicle designed purely to transport great amounts of cargo from 
one part of the city to another, as quickly as possible. A utilitarian approach has been taken to design and the Roadliner, in 
common with many of its rivals, is little more than a shaped box on wheels with an underslung powerplant helping to maintain a 
low centre of gravity. There have been some questions raised as to the Fat Boy’s stability when fully loaded but it has passed all 
Justice Department tests successfully and has been approved for citizens’ use. 
Dimensions

===PAGE 145===
 Megways and Skedways
144
Dimensions
Height 3,800mm
Width 2,590mm
Length 15 metres
Wheelbase 10,714mm
Weight 13,800kg
Fuel Capacity 400 litres
Powerplant DUF 9000 Slingbox
Full Speed 225kph
Max Speed 375m per round
Acceleration 42m per round
Deceleration 50m per round
Cost Cr. 65,000
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility –1
Crew 3 (1 driver, plus 2 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 6
Hull/Structure 3/4
Cargo 10 tons
Weapons None


===PAGE 146===
 Megways and Skedways
145
Justice Department Vehicles
The Justice Department maintains an enormous and diverse ﬂ eet of different vehicles. Every Sector House has its own Justice 
Garage, administered and maintained by Tek Division, which keeps, for Sector use, a compliment of Pat, Meat and H wagons. 
Larger vehicles, such as the Manta and Land Raider, are specialised vehicles that must be called-in from Justice Central.
 Pat Wagon – Mk III
After the Lawmaster, the Mk III Pat-Wagon is the most commonly sighted Justice Department vehicle seen on the streets of 
Mega-City One. Designed to be ﬂ exible enough to bring the law to citizen riots and armoured perps, as well as ful ﬁ l the grunt 
work of catch and meat wagon teams, the Mk III Pat-Wagon is well respected amongst the Judges for being able to take just 
about any punishment the streets can give. The turret-mounted street cannon is a specialised variant of the bike cannon found 
on the Lawmaster and is capable of ﬁ ring a variety of ammunition, such as ﬂ are, gas and solid rounds. The Pat Wagon also 
carries a Riot Foam dispenser used to encase and quell angry mobs during riots, demonstrations and Block Wars. 
The Mk IV Pat-Wagon, an anti-grav version of the Mk III, is also common in many sectors and grants freedom to pursue perps 
over rougher ground than its predecessor. The Mk IV has space for only 1 ton of cargo and 8 passengers, due to the increased 
size of its powerplant. 
Dimensions
Height 3.75m
Width 2.5m
Length 7.5m
Wheelbase 2,200mm
Weight 30,000kg
Fuel Capacity 1,000 litres
Powerplant Notron Hi-Pow 8000T, H-Cell/Biofuel Hybrid
Full Speed 225kph
Max Speed 316m per round
Acceleration 50m per round
Deceleration 60m per round
Cost MCr. 2.5
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +0
Crew 2 (driver and co-driver, plus capacity for 10 passengers or perps)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 20
Hull/Structure 8/8
Cargo 2 tons
Weapons Turret Mounted 20mm Street Cannon (see page 73); Riot Foam blaster

===PAGE 147===
 Megways and Skedways
146
 Meat Wagon
Of similar design to the Pat Wagon, a Meat Wagon is speci ﬁ cally equipped to haul away casualties from the scene of an 
incident. It is equipped with life support facilities, plus automated hover stretchers and body-bagging units for the inevitabl e 
litany of corpses the vehicles have to deal with.
Dimensions
Height 3.75m
Width 2.5m
Length 7.5m
Wheelbase 2,200mm
Weight 30,000kg
Fuel Capacity 1,000 litres
Powerplant Notron Hi-Pow 8000T, H-Cell/Biofuel Hybrid
Full Speed 225kph
Max Speed 375m per round
Acceleration 50m per round
Deceleration 58m per round
Cost MCr. 3.5
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility +0
Crew 2 (driver and co-driver, plus capacity for 10 passengers or perps)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 20
Hull/Structure 8/8
Cargo 1.5 tons
Weapons Turret Mounted 20mm Street Cannon (see page 73)
 H-Wagon
The H-Wagon is an eternal sight in the skies of Mega-City One, monitoring all aerial traf ﬁ c and responding to emergencies 
that require heavy ﬁ repower. Too large to patrol the streets themselves, the H-Wagon is a highly agile vehicle that can handle 
attacking hovercraft and the worst weather of the Cursed Earth with ease.
Dimensions
Height 3,100mm
Width 7m
Length 16m
Wheelbase —
Weight 120,000kg
Fuel Capacity 3,600 litres
Powerplant Notron grav anti-gravity propulsion unit
Full Speed 1,250kph
Max Speed 1,765 per round
Acceleration 232m per round
Deceleration 280m per round
Cost MCr. 8
Statistics
Skill Flyer (grav)

===PAGE 148===
 Megways and Skedways
147
Agility +1
Crew 15 (1 pilot and co-pilot, 1 gunner, plus up to 12 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 20
Hull/Structure 8/8
Cargo 2 tons
Weapons 2 x Hi Ex Missile Launchers; 2 x Heavy Lasers
 Manta Prowl Tank
The Manta Prowl Tank was the Justice Department’s answer to a growing crime wave. Often regarded as a mobile ﬂ oating 
fortress of anti-crime measures, a Manta can strike fear into the heart of the most desperate perp and is fully capable of dealing 
with entire riots by itself. Capable of great speed, this anti-grav tank features a Peterson High Intensity Laser Cannon, with 
adjustable wide beam mode, stumm gas dispensers and riot foam jets as its primary armament, allowing it to tackle anything 
from an angry citizen mob to the most heavily-armoured vehicle a perp can ﬁ eld. In addition, the Manta is also armed with 
two twin-linked fast-action anti-personnel lasers and can be further modi ﬁ ed with heavier weaponry as the situation demands, 
potentially making it the equal of any battle tank in terms of ﬁ repower. On-board holding cells can imprison up to thirty perps. 
Two pilots control its great bulk with an exceptional agility, whilst four Street Judges constantly monitor the on-board scanners 
for any sign of local crime, ready to take the Law to perps outside upon Lawmasters also stored within the Manta’s forward 
bay. There are compartments that allow the onboard Tek and Med Judges to function effectively, whilst more Street Judges 
monitor the holding cells, communications and weapon systems of the tank, while overall command is given to a senior Judge. 
With such capability built into one heavily armoured hull, the Manta Prowl Tank is an outward symbol of the Judge’s absolute 
authority within Mega-City One.
Dimensions
Height 3.5m
Width 5m
Length 10m
Wheelbase —
Weight 90,000kg
Fuel Capacity 1,000 litres
Powerplant Notron J Series Mega-Pulse antigrav powerplant
Full Speed 300kph
Max Speed 500m per round
Acceleration 56m per round
Deceleration 68m per round
Cost MCr. 9
Statistics
Skill Flyer (grav)
Agility –1
Crew 18 (1 pilot and co-pilot, plus auxiliary staff; capacity for up to 30 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 20
Hull/Structure 10/10
Cargo 8 tons
Weapons Petersen Heavy Laser (hi-intensity – but treat as Heavy Laser), 2 x linked Laser 
Lances; 8 x Stumm Gas Grenade launchers; 6 x Riot Foam dispensers; 
Statistics

===PAGE 149===
 Megways and Skedways
148
 Land Raider
A highly specialised combat vehicle, the Lezney A2000 Land Raider is a two-part vehicle that links to form a single ﬁ ghting 
unit. The statistics below give speci ﬁ cations for the two independent units and then a third set for the combined Land Raider 
assembly.
The Land Raider’s most famous assignment was the trek across the Cursed Earth undertaken by Dredd and Spikes Harvey 
Rotten to deliver the vaccine for the 2T-FRU-T virus af ﬂ icting Mega-City 2. This was considered a trial mission and, although 
the Land Raider acquitted itself well in the harsh conditions and against very difﬁ cult foes, the Justice Department decided not 
to advance the Land Raider programme beyond the six or so already built and held at the Tek Division’s Vehicle Testing HQ. 
Thus, there are ﬁ ve Land Raiders still in existence in Mega-City One and, occasionally, they are deployed for certain specialised 
missions.
Raider
The primary vehicle is the Raider wheeled vehicle. A sleek, fast, all-terrain armoured personnel carrier, it is shielded agains t 
EMP, radiation and chemical attacks. Fitted with a front-mounted General Arms Laser Destroyer Mk III Lazooka, plus a pair of 
linked Heavy Spitguns, the Raider is a formidable machine in its own right. The lazooka, drawing on the Raider’s powerplant, 
can maintain ﬁ re in battle conditions, although it takes 1 full Combat Round for the weapon to recharge before ﬁ ring again.
Dimensions
Height 2.5m
Width 3.1m
Length 7.76m
Wheelbase 5,542mm
Weight 13,600kg
Fuel Capacity 1,000 litres
Powerplant Lesney Active Fuzion 779 Turbo
Full Speed On Road 240kph
Off Road 180kph
Max Speed On Road 400 per round
Off Road 250m per round
Acceleration On Road 44m per round
Off Road 34m per round
Deceleration On Road 52m per round
Off Road 40m per round
Cost MCr. 10
Statistics
Skill Drive (wheeled)
Agility –2
Crew 6 (Driver and Co-Driver, plus 4 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 18
Hull/Structure 8/8
Cargo 500 kg
Weapons Lazooka, 2x linked Heavy Spitguns

===PAGE 150===
 Megways and Skedways
149
Killdozer
The Killdozer forms the rear assembly of the combined Land Raider and, on its own, is a heavily armoured, tank-like weapons 
platform designed for all terrain conditions and sustained battleﬁ eld deployment. Its tracks are set in an asymmetrical pyramid 
conﬁ guration allowing for a small footprint and high manoeuvrability but with the same rough terrain performance as larger, 
lower-framed tanks. The battle unit has enough room for stabling four Lawmasters (or equivalent-sized bikes) with a rear-facing, 
armoured, loading/unloading ramp for rapid vehicle deployment. The interior cabin has a conning-tower command bridge with 
excellent visibility via 5cm thick armour-glass. The whole unit is EMP, radiation and chemically shielded, with an onboard life  
support system with a 4 week reserve, including air and water recycling facilities and preserved food storage.
In terms of weaponry, the Killdozer carries six linked rapid- ﬁ re 20mm cannon (equivalent to bike cannon), two pop-up turret 
mounted heavy lasers and, mounted on the roof of the conning tower, a pair of Mauley missile launchers. The missile battery is 
typically 50 x Hi-Ex missiles and 20 x Homing missiles. The launchers can be operated in linked or unlinked modes.
The Killdozer’s computer system allows it to act in full automatic in the same manner as a Lawmaster bike, taking commands 
by remote verbal instruction or from pre-programmed routines.
Dimensions
Height 6.5m
Width 8.5m
Length 6m
Wheelbase —
Weight 27,000kg
Fuel Capacity 1,000 litres
Powerplant Lesney Active Fuzion 779 Turbo
Full Speed On Road 100kph
Off Road 80kph
Max Speed On Road 166m per round
Off Road 133 per round
Acceleration On Road 21m per round
Off Road 27m per round
Deceleration On Road 24m per round
Off Road 29m per round
Cost MCr. 25
Statistics
Skill Drive (tracked)
Agility –2
Crew 6 (1 driver, 5 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 24
Hull/Structure 10/10
Cargo 5 tons
Weapons 6 x 20mm Street Cannon (see page 73); 2 x Heavy Lasers; 2 x Mauley Missile 
Launchers

===PAGE 151===
 Megways and Skedways
150
Land Raider Unit
Coupled together, the Raider and Killdozer use the main computerised power management systems from the Killdozer to 
optimise the speed and capabilities of the complete unit.
Dimensions
Height 6.5m
Width 8.5m
Length 14m
Wheelbase 5,542mm
Weight 40,600kg
Fuel Capacity 2,000 litres
Powerplant Lesney Active Fuzion 779 Turbo
Full Speed On Road 170kph
Off Road 115kph
Max Speed On Road 283m per round
Off Road 191m per round
Acceleration On Road 41m per round
Off Road 31m per round
Deceleration On Road 46 per round
Off Road 36m per round
Cost MCr. 35
Statistics
Skill Drive (tracked)
Agility –2
Crew 6 (1 driver, 5 passengers)
Open/Closed Closed
Armour 24
Hull/Structure 10/10
Cargo 5.5 tons
Weapons As per individual units
 Spaceships
Detailed discussion of spaceships is beyond the scope of the Judge Dredd main rules but will no doubt be covered in future 
supplements. However, as is clear from the Dredd saga, space ﬂ ight is not only commonplace, the Earth has established 
colonies throughout the galaxy and come into contact with numerous alien races.
Spaceships conform to the rules provided in both the Traveller Core Rulebook and High Guard. Faster than light travel 
is achieved through hyperdrive engines that equate to the standard, Traveller Jump Drive, with Manoeuvre drives being used 
for in-system transit (such as around the solar system). Justice Department maintains its own ﬂ eet of shuttles – notably for 
transporting prisoners to Titan – and hyperdrive equipped ships such as Justice One, used by Dredd during the quest for the 
Judge Child.
Corporate and privately owned spaceships are licensed via the Justice Department’s Space Licensing Unit, a part of Tek 
Division, which registers ship use, destinations, manifests and so forth. This enables Justice Department to trace any off-world 
cargoes that may pose a threat back to their source of entry.
Mega-City One operates its own starport: The Eustace Fargo Spaceport – a grade A facility – out of Sector 40; the part of old 
New York once occupied by the John F Kennedy terrestrial airport.


===PAGE 152===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 153===
 Mega-City One
152
A Mile High 
View
Mega-City One spans the eastern seaboard of the United 
States of America, ranging from Maine in the north right 
down to North Carolina in the south and across to the west 
as far as Atlanta, Dayton, Cleveland and up to Hartford: 
an area of around 125,000 square kilometres. The entire 
area of Mega-City One is urbanised: what little agricultural 
land that exists is contained within the massive Agridomes 
that provide year-round, fully-automated crop production 
of basic vegetable proteins that go into the staple food of 
the city; munce. Otherwise, that entire stretch of eastern 
North America is a seemingly endless urban sprawl, the 
result of over-zealous metropolitan planning to deal with 
the burgeoning population of the early 21
st Century and 
the development of new building materials and techniques 
allowing structures to go higher, more safely, more cheaply 
and in greater concentrations than ever before. Mega-City 
One spreads across and down the North American coastline 
like a virus, its nucleus being the Washington/New York/
Boston axis, and its only limit being the sensibility of the 
architects who realised that Mega-City One had to have a 
plan and had to have an end somewhere.
The notion was to offer security and prosperity to citizens, 
doing away with the underclass that had always troubled 
American society but at the same time giving everyone the 
kind of lifestyle that had been promised since the cheap, pulp 
science ﬁ ction novels of the mid-20
th Century: maximum free 
time; no need to work (unless you wanted to); obedient robots 
to handle the drudge tasks; hyper-fast, intelligent transport 
networks; a home, with all mod-cons for every citizen; free 
energy derived from all manner of sources (vast, solar-panel 
arrays, deep-drilled sinks below the Earth’s crust to tap into 
the limitless energy reserves of the mantle); fully interactive 
entertainments delivered through the internet, including 
tridee participatory broadcasts; and placing all citizens, 
irrespective of colour, creed or class, on an equal footing. 
Mega-City One was America’s last, unchallenged version of 
the American Dream: it had to work; people would make it 
work. The citizens of the Mega Cities would be prosperous, 
free to enjoy life and on an equal footing.
So Mega-City One evolved to provide all these things. As 
disparate cities merged and land at ground level became 
scarce, the developers just went up, creating buildings that 
would stretch up to a mile high. The city’s various sectors, 
centred on the old city boundaries, gained more and more 
levels to support the burgeoning starscrapers and city 
blocks. Man’s ambitions were lofty and the buildings loftier 
still. Perspective was lost as the physical perspective 
rocketed towards the heavens. Super-strong alloys like 
plasteen and plastisteel made the safest structures ever 
known. Numerous levels made layered cities, like the strata 
of a rock, so that a population far larger than a traditional 
city of the same area could be accommodated. And, for a 
while, the experiment worked. People ﬂ ocked into the Mega-
City, taking advantage of free homes and exceedingly cheap 
food and free energy, desperate to take advantage of the 
Lifestyle of the Future. The city ﬂ oor fell away from them; 
their horizons were dominated by the heights of the city 
blocks and the spaghetti-like morass of megways, skedways 
and inter-zooms. The future seemed boundless; the people 
were happy. Mostly. An abundance of leisure time and the 
service of obedient, uncomplaining robots, meant people 
could indulge themselves on a scale that had never been 
possible.
The Mega-City One experiment was copied everywhere. 
Mega-City Two developed along the west coast and along 
similar lines, the city absorbing every urban centre between 
Seattle and San Diego. Texas City sprang up around 
Houston and soon encompassed the whole of the state of 
Texas and parts of Arkansas. In Russia, the East Meg cities 
developed around Moscow and St Petersburg. In the United 
Kingdom, Brit-Cit saw London swarm across the south coast 
and pulse upwards to the midland cities of Birmingham, 
Leicester and across the Norwich. In Australia, Oz repeated 
the trend along the vastness of the east coat, taking in 
Sidney, Melbourne and up to Cairns. Every nation had to 
have a Mega-City. Sometimes two. All of them modelled 
themselves on Mega-City One but none of them equalled it; 
not in terms of ambition, grandeur or, sadly, crime.
It was inevitable that the American Dream would turn into 
a nightmare, because America had never had a good track 
record where dreams were concerned. The incredible 
complexities of administrating Mega-City One meant that 
traditional policing rapidly became inefﬁ cient. With a population, 
at its height, of 800 million, governing the city was beyond 
even the capabilities of the politicians who had been Mega-
City One’s architects. Much could be automated, of course; 
and much was. But what cannot be automated and controlled 
is the human propensity for boredom and sel ﬁ shness. The 
citizens of Mega-City One had everything they wanted but, 
as is always the case, people wanted more. When there are 
two few police and when those police are virtually invisible, 
selﬁ shness sets-in and people forget about the rules that 
society needs to function properly. When the judicial system 
grinds to a virtual halt because it has failed to keep pace with 
the rapid progress of a city’s expansion, people can, and do, 
get away with murder. Create any utopia and humans will be 
guaranteed to turn it into a dystopia. The American Dream 
turned sour and then went rotten. It was inevitable. Progress 
is always pursued by the elements of decay.

===PAGE 154===
 Mega-City One
153
Crime, then, became rampant. The city became very, very 
full. The Immigration Laws of 2055 aimed to curb the swarms 
of people who wanted to get into an over-full metropolis but 
merely succeeded in causing mass civil unrest. Deep in the 
heart of Mega-City One, buried in the layers of metro-levels, 
segregated by the skedways and overzooms, organised 
crime – something almost stamped-out in the early 21
st 
Century – spewed its way back into life and set about 
corrupting those who could be corrupted, far from the sight 
of traditional justice. Mega-City One’s dark places became 
darker. The higher reaches became the goal of those who 
had plenty of money and they ensured that they insulated 
themselves from the damp-rot seeping up through the 
plasteen of the city blocks. That dream of all citizens living in 
equality evaporated like tears dropped into a blast furnace: 
segregation and class distinctions asserted themselves just 
as they always would – because humans are, inherently, 
selﬁ sh brute-beasts who revert to a natural state of war at 
the ﬁ rst opportunity. As an experiment in architectural and 
technological magniﬁ cence, Mega-City One was a triumph. 

===PAGE 155===
 Mega-City One
154
As an experiment in social harmonisation, it was an abject 
failure. As one wit remarked, ‘If that guy Darwin was still 
around, he’d be sayin’, “Gee. Like, I told you so!”’
 Mega-City One 
Essentials
Mega-City One is organised into 305 judicial areas called 
sectors. Each sector follows, very roughly, old borders and 
district divisions from the pre-Atomic War United States. 
The States divisions are gone, although the legacy of the 
cultures of those states still live on through quaint traditions 
and practices – such as the urbane sophistication of the old 
New England sectors in the north.
Every sector is a self-contained administrative unit under 
the effective legal control of the Justice Department Sector 
House. 
MegCentral (Sectors 1-20)
Population: 30 million.
Famous Landmarks: Mega-City Chamber of Horrors, Gus 
Grissom Spaceport.
The geographical centre of Mega-City One where most of 
the larger space and hoverports are located.
MegEast (Sectors 21-108)
Population: 100 million.
Famous Landmarks: Academy of Law, Alien Penitentiary, 
Alien Zoo, Central Mega-City Library, City Hall, Costa Del 
Meg, Empire State Building, Grand Hall of Justice, Mega-City 
Museum, Museum of Death, Ocean Sprawl, Psi-Division HQ, 
Sinotown, Statue of Judgement, Statue of Liberty, Weather 
Congress, the White Cliffs of Dover.
MegEast has the highest crime rates in the city, for major 
smuggling rings work the docks along the East Wall. Man-
made canals assist sky truks in conveying goods from the 
merchant hoverships anchored outside.
MegSouth (Sectors 109-160)
Population: 85 million.
Famous Landmarks: Amalgamated Munce, Meg-Oil, Little 
Cuba, Nukco, Plastoid Industries, Power Tower, Roadliners 
Inc, Sunshine Synthifoods.
The centremost sectors are given over to a massive industrial 
zone called the Dust Belt. All structures within the belt draw 
their energy from Power Tower and subsidiary stations. A 
safety ‘dead zone’ separates the factories from city blocks 
sandwiched between the Dust Belt and the South Wall
.
MegWest (Sectors 161-240)
Population: 75 million.
Famous Landmarks: Apetown, The Jungle, Mega-City Vibe 
Bowl, Moonray Tower.
Meg-West borders the Cursed Earth and is vulnerable to 
mutant break-ins and alien contagion.
MegNorth (Sectors 241-300)
Population: 95 million.
Famous Landmarks: Big-1 Publishing, MegaMedia Inc, 
NERDCO.
Home to more wealthy citizens and corporate headquarters 
than the rest of the city combined.
Meg-West Hab Zone (Sectors 
301-305)
Population: 15 million.
The only section of Mega-City One beyond the City Wall, the 
North-West Hab Zone suffers the city’s second highest crime 
rates. The megway aptly named Hell’s Highway is the only 
physical link between the Hab and its parent city, spanning 
the radioactive wasteland of Nuke Alley.
Sector Secretariats
Every sector is administered locally through a robotic 
bureaucracy that is controlled by the sector Secretariat. The 
Secretariat is effectively beholden to the Justice Department 
but it takes charge of general, civil affairs, whilst the Justice 
Department, through the Sector Houses, looks after law and 
order. The Secretariat ensures highways are maintained 
(again, through robot repair crews), schools supplied, hospitals 
provided and so forth. The Justice Department, via the Sector 
House, can inﬂ uence and override the Secretariat at any point 
and without any warning; and it frequently does. When Block 
War breaks out, political niceties need to take second or third 
place to the Rule of Law. The Secretariats then, have little 
more than a basic (though extensive) administrative function 
in each sector. The competence of the Secretariat contributes 
much to the sector’s character: lax Secretariats inevitably mean 
deprivation in some sectors, leading to higher crime rates and 
more work for the Judges. Even though the Secretariats are 
largely robotised, humans still govern the upper echelons and, 
because the humans of the 22
nd Century are perhaps far more 
ﬂ awed than in earlier centuries, levels of competence, public 
duty and civic pride vary wildly.

===PAGE 156===
 Mega-City One
155
 Mayor of Mega-City One
A ceremonial role, the Of ﬁ ce of the Mayor was dissolved 
during Judge Cal’s rule but reinstated later under Chief 
Judge Volt’s reforms. The mayor is considered to be the 
First Citizen of the city, elected by the people, for the people, 
but in reality he or she is little more than a ﬁ gurehead. Civic 
power rests with the Secretariats and all truly important 
political decisions are taken by the Justice Department 
through the Council of Five and Chief Judge. The mayor, 
supported by his own robot bureaucracy, rubber-stamps 
wide-scale city projects, looks at accounts from the Sector 
Secretariats and occasionally gets involved in key decisions 
regarding the true politics of the city. But, in reality, there are 
few citizens who have anything like the force of personality 
and political will necessary to stand-up to and challenge 
the Justice Department. Life is much easier whenever the 
mayor sticks to his position and keeps his nose out of the 
important things, such as how best to run the city. The last 
time politicians were left to run anything, atomic war broke 
out. The people might have forgotten that but the Justice 
Department certainly has not.
Economy and Income
With robots performing 97% of the revenue-generating 
activities of Mega-City One, the economy of such a huge city 
is actually highly ef ﬁ cient. Production is 24/7 with little time 
lost to illness or industrial dispute. Things get made, grown 
and exported. Mega-City One is the foremost producer in the 
world with exports going to the other mega cities across the 
globe. As a result, its revenues are high and steady – even 
following the tragedy of the Apocalypse War.
Mass automation means that citizens do not need to work. 
A burgeoning economy means that just about every citizen 
is on welfare. Every citizen receives a regular, monthly City 
Payment (known as the Mega Dole) from which to pay for 
rent, food, lifestyle and so forth. There is clearly little income 
tax but citizens are taxed on goods they buy and services 
they use, with 70% of the tax going into the Secretariat 
coffers and 30% going to the Mayor’s Exchequer. Those 
citizens who want a job and can ﬁ nd one (or make one), 
pay a ﬂ at 10% Job Tax, although the astute and wealthy can 
afford to easily ﬁ nd ways of avoiding Job Tax altogether.
Citizens can gain bonuses to their Mega Dole by undertaking 
certain civic duties, such as joining Citi-Def or taking part in 
local voluntary schemes but otherwise everyone receives 
the same, ﬂ at, Cr. 3,000 every month. If Mega-City One’s 
combined economic output is especially healthy in a particular 
quarter, then a further bonus is paid to citizens, based on the 
proﬁ t balance. This is one of the mayor’s duties: signing off 

===PAGE 157===
 Mega-City One
156
and belittled you, copied your block’s ideas and besmirched 
your name. Grab your spitguns and raid the Citi-Def armoury 
because, boy, those neighbours have got it coming.
Block War happens for the slightest reasons or none at 
all. Simply put, every able-bodied man, woman and child 
grabs a weapon, leans out of their window and unleashes 
it against any visible target in a neighbouring block. Citi-Def 
units, found in every City Block, are there to protect Mega-
City One as a civic defence force; but most commonly they 
fuel Block Wars, levelling entire storeys of enemy blocks 
with missiles, rapid- ﬁ re hi-ex rounds and generally turning 
from Citi-Def into Citi-Death. Once Block War is declared, 
mass hysteria takes over and just about everyone gets 
swept into the con ﬂ ict. Any weapon will do and age is no 
barrier. Schools take on schools; hospitals empty to go 
and join the carnage. Some citizens are professional Block 
Agitators, stockpiling weapons in readiness for the next war 
and cranking-up the rumour-mill to get a war started ASAP. 
These small minorities face life in the cubes when caught but 
that adrenaline rush felt when the cry of ‘Block War! Get the 
Drokkers!’ goes up, makes the risk worth it.
Every City Block has a weekly People’s Assembly, open to 
all citizens, where the agenda is to discuss life within one’s 
own City Block. This rarely happens. The assemblies are 
generally less concerned with local welfare than criticising 
neighbouring blocks and adding bile- ﬂ avoured grist to the 
rumour-mill. Block Agitators seek-out speaking positions 
at the assemblies in order to foment unrest and so Judges 
usually keep an eye on especially notorious and troublesome 
block assemblies to both prevent agitators and identify 
them. The Wally Squad has special Block Squads who go 
deep undercover to penetrate agitation rings and break 
them, before they break the blocks. But, truth be told, the 
Judges’ best efforts (and they really are rather good) make 
only a small dent in the propensity for Block War. Citizens 
have precious else to liven-up their dull days and, Judges 
have noted, petty crime in the wake of a Block War drops 
signiﬁ cantly for a sustained period (as does the population 
count, naturally).
City Block Organisation
City Blocks range in size greatly. Any City Block has a 
population of 1d6+1x10,000 citizens but there are more 
populous blocks and wealthy, less populous ones. Every 
block is built to a standard design: the lowest ten storeys 
are given over to public amenities (shops, food-joints, bars 
and the like); the middle ten to sixty storeys are apartments, 
ofﬁ ces and so forth; and the upper ten or so storeys house 
the block’s services: water, power generators, climate control 
and so forth. The very roof of the block houses the Citi-Def 
armoury and watch posts, so that, in the event of an attack, 
the bonus each quarter – although the Justice Department 
actually decides how much it will be and carefully makes 
sure that when a bonus is warranted it is neither too low nor 
too high. Even when times are lean, the mayor often signs-
off the bonus anyway, on Justice Department advice: nasty 
riots tend to follow whenever a bonus has been withheld 
and so the Justice Department ensures that a bonus fund 
is available to ensure a quarterly bonus can be paid, even 
when the economic performance for the quarter would 
otherwise warrant a low bonus or none at all.
The quarterly bonus paid as part of the Mega Dole is 2d6+3% 
of the Mega Dole’s ﬂ at rate. So, an average, a citizen can 
expect an additional Cr. 300 per quarter or as much as Cr. 
450. When times are lean, it may be as low as Cr. 150 but 
only in the direst circumstances is it nothing at all.
City Blocks
The vast bulk of citizens live in the towering City Blocks; self-
contained, high-rise communities of, on average, 50,000 
people. City Blocks contain all necessary amenities: shops, 
food-joints and restaurants, vid-theatres and concert halls, 
gyms and sport-domes, aggrodomes (for loosing-off pent-
up aggression, although aggrodomes are strictly licensed by 
the Justice Department following a series of large-scale riots 
– the result of uncontrolled, pent-up aggression) and so forth. 
Many citizens never, ever, venture out of their City Block, 
ﬁ nding everything they need within its plastisteel and synthi-
rock walls. Life within a City Block is relatively safe (in other 
words, the chances of being mugged, robbed, assaulted 
or abused are slightly less than on the open streets) but 
stiﬂ ingly dull. As most citizens have no jobs, minds roll idle. 
Ghastly vid-shows offer train-crash entertainment, regularly 
peddling new crazes and shock-horror stories for no better 
reason than public titillation. Apartments are cramped; 
and it is impossible to ﬁ nd peace and quiet in a City Block. 
Everything is open to public scrutiny and, if the rumour-mill 
starts, even for the most innocuous behaviour, it can rapidly 
escalate into a witch-hunt. Judges have investigated many 
murders and assaults caused by nothing more than a false 
rumour triggering a mistaken belief that an innocent citizen 
has committed some heinous crime. City Blocks create a 
mob-mentality. Individuality is drained-out and replaced with 
an inane allegiance to the block’s communal identity. Every 
neighbouring block has it easier, richer, bigger, better and 
freer than one’s own. Petty jealousy is fuelled on a daily 
basis. Linda Evans Block starts a new fashion trend? Joan 
Collins Block asserts that it started the same trend ﬁ rst (even 
though it did not). The result is Block War.
 Block War
Sometimes there is simply no alternative but to blast the grud 
out of those no-good neighbours. They have taunted you 

===PAGE 158===
 Mega-City One
157
Citi-Def can retaliate against aerial attack. Unfortunately, 
the Citi-Def emplacements are equally suited to retaliating 
against other City Blocks, as already noted.
The residential storeys of the City Block are named from 
Z to A and then AZ through to AA the higher one gets up 
the block. Higher is generally better. Premium apartments 
are found in the AZ to AA range and the ‘Double Letter’ 
citizens like to look down, physically and culturally, on the 
‘Singletons’.
Apartments conform to a standard size. A to Z apartments 
are 66m
2 with two bedrooms, kitchenette, bathroom and 
living room. AA to AZ apartments are 122m 2 with a variety 
of conﬁ gurations (up to four bedrooms, bigger lounges and 
kitchens, luxury bathrooms and so on). Every apartment 
comes equipped with a kitchen unit, cooler unit, water 
puriﬁ er and an integrated ﬂ at-screen vid-display to access 
the City Block’s local vid channels and those broadcast city 
wide. On average each residential ﬂ oor has up to a hundred 
apartments and ﬂ oor pride is every bit in evidence as block 
pride. Inter-storey wars are not uncommon, with rivalries 
fuelled by snobbishness spilling over into bloodshed. Floor 
rivalries are usually only supplanted by block rivalries and, 
when the Block War cry goes up, inter-storey enemies 
suddenly become inter-storey allies as they take aim at the 
hated neighbours across the plaza.
Beneath the public amenities storeys are storage areas, 
vehicle parks and maintenance rooms. The basements 
of City Blocks are warrens of dark passages, labyrinthine 
tunnels and narrow, dangerous walkways. Only maintenance 
robots and the criminal underclass descend into the bowels 
of a city block; those and a smattering of refugees and 
mutants who want to keep well away from the streets so they 
remain in the city unmolested. Entire, forgotten communities 
of muties, trogs, perps and other wretches inhabit the City 
Block underbellies, meaning that the true population of 
a City Block can be larger than the known, upper storey 
inhabitants.
Block Assemblies
Every block has a citizen assembly. The idea is to have an 
open forum where every one of a block’s residents has a say 
in how the block is run. In reality, things are nowhere close to 
this lofty ideal. Those who desire power and shout the loudest 
dominate proceedings; most citizens are too apathetic to get 
involved with anything as boring as block administration and 
politics. Thus, most block assemblies end up being dominated 
by a handful of petty powerbrokers who enjoy lording it over 
their silo-like domains or stirring-up trouble as an antidote to 
the tediousness of Mega-City One life.
Essentially, block names are quirky, 
reﬂ ect social whimsy and have no real 
basis in logic. When naming blocks for Judge 
Dredd campaigns, look to what is popular in 
politics, entertainment and sport currently. Some 
example block names that might appeal are:
• Amy Winehouse Rejuve Conapts
• Ant and Dec Towers
• Georgie Brown Block
• Gokky Wan Underblock
• Jonny Woss Block
• Katey Winslet Block
• Leo DiCaprio Block
• Nick Cotton Sub-Slum Block
• Phil Tufnell Lux Apartments
... and so on...
Some block assemblies are open forums with no elected 
representatives. Others elect members, rather like the old 
parliaments of the pre-Atomic War era were elected. In others 
still, representatives are self-appointed, seizing control and 
becoming petty tyrants or dictators, ruling through sheer 
force of presence, charm, intimidation or bullying. This is 
particularly prevalent in those sectors where the mob still has 
a signiﬁ cant inﬂ uence. The maﬁ a gangs either control a city 
block outright or control the people who run the assembly. 
Either way, block assemblies rarely do much to represent 
the welfare of the block and those living in it. Assemblies are 
generally shouting shops and hotbeds of hatred directed at 
neighbouring blocks. The actual things that matter within a 
block – like the standards of living conditions, maintenance 
and repairs and so forth, are usually ignored until they 
reach a point when it is usually too late. Block assemblies 
look to Judges to maintain law and order; Citi-Def units to 
protect them (or blast the grud out of neighbours) and the 
Sector Secretariat to anticipate things like maintenance and 
repair. Negligence, petty corruption, naked self-interest and 
personal agendas are rife. Common sense and civic duty 
are commodities in very short supply.
Block Names
The fashion is for city blocks to be named after celebrities, 
sports stars, politicians and public ﬁ gures from the pre-Atomic 
War era. For some strange reason the fashion seemed to 

===PAGE 159===
 Mega-City One
158
slightly-better-off citizens. A typical conapt is much larger 
and better furnished than those in other blocks and may 
even occupy an entire level of their own. Just like city blocks, 
conapts are given popular names for easy identi ﬁ cation. A 
conapt is typically no higher than ﬁ fty levels, although some 
mansion-esque variants stand at only two or three levels. 
City blockers are known to harbour resentment and even 
jealousy towards conapt tenants and juve gangs sometimes 
single out a conapt as their target, defacing it with scrawls 
or smashing windows and breaking down doors, if they can 
bypass the elaborate security systems.
Condos
Space condominiums are satellite habitats locked in geo-
stationary orbit in Mega-City One space, each capable of 
housing up to one hundred thousand citizens. Each condo 
is a city sector in miniature, typically incorporating conapts 
beneath their domes as well as schools, hospitals, factories, 
hydroponic farms and atmospheric generation plants. 
Nearly all of these condos are privately owned and most of 
the population is made up of the cream of the Mega-City 
One social elite, anxious to get away from the squalor and 
overcrowding of the city. However, the Slum Clearance Act 
of 2105 stated that all new private housing developments 
must provide a 29% donation to the public sector, meaning 
nearly a third of any new condo belonged to the city itself. 
The Housing Department re-settled families of dummies 
aboard the luxury Condos and within hours, the corridors 
and hallways were ﬁ lled with garbage, the beautiful pedways 
and parks vandalised. Many private tenants quickly moved 
out, allowing the city to buy up the rest of the condos at a 
fraction of their true value and creating orbital slums.
Crock Blocks
While every city block has its own population of OACs (Old 
Age Citizens – anyone over the age of 75), the arrangements 
of a crock block cater speci ﬁ cally for the elderly. OACs can 
spend their last few years in the specialist wrinkle shops, the 
gossiparamas or take treatment for their imaginary illnesses 
in the placebo wards of the med-bay. Every crock block 
has its own euthanasium, offering an OAC tired of life or 
crippled by disease, a painless, humane and digni ﬁ ed exit. 
Crock blocks are specially designed to accommodate the 
restricted mobility of their residents, with gentle slopes, wide 
corridors and pedways for zimmerskimmers and robochairs. 
Some, like the Crockery Nook Home for the Extremely Aged, 
cater for OACs with extensive cybernetic or bionic body 
parts. Crock blocks have their own share of problems, the 
most common of these being the OACs’ addiction to Bingo, 
a banned gambling game. Illegal life-prolonging aids like 
organ legging and Stookie pills are also smuggled into crock 
blocks in exchange for pension
 cheques.
focus on such people from the old United Kingdom. So it is 
that Mega-City One has city blocks such as the Elsie Tanner, 
Kenny Barlow and Mitchell Bros blocks: names that mean 
precious little to the block’s residents but re ﬂ ect bygone 
times when these people ﬁ gured large in United Kingdom 
folklore.
The fashion is not limited to ancient UK soap opera 
characters; American sitcom stars like Larry David and Lucy 
Ball have been honoured with a block named after them. 
The trend extends to ex-presidents and political ﬁ gures. The 
Barry Obama, Hilly Clinton and Sazza Palin blocks hark-
back to a monumental presidential election of the very early 
21
st Century. Likewise the Buzz Aldrin, Neil Armstrong and 
Yuri Gagarin blocks mark man’s ﬁ rst voyages into space and 
to the Moon.
Cardboard Cities
Whilst, in theory, every citizen receives enough Mega Dole 
to cover living expenses – as little as Cr. 20 a night is needed 
to obtain a bed in a Stacker – there are always a few who 
slip through the net. More blocks than the Secretariats would 
care to admit are surrounded by a small shantytown made 
from discarded plasteen containers and crates, where the 
homeless gather together for protection. The homeless 
themselves are a diverse lot as many are unable to keep up 
with crippling debt repayments and others are drug addicts 
who spend every credit they have to support their habit. A 
few are formerly rich and powerful citizens who have been 
sued into abject poverty. More, known as Neverwheres, are 
people who do not appear on any city database and cannot 
claim any welfare payments. While most of these are illegal 
immigrants or mutants who have sneaked into the city, 
some have been deliberately or accidentally erased from 
Barney by juve hackers looking for a laugh or incompetent 
City Hall employees. Such people have no option but to 
eke out a miserable existence by scavenging through the 
waste that more prosperous citizens leave behind or resort 
to illegally begging for a few credits from passers-by. While 
many normal citizens are not aware of the existence of the 
cardboard cities – the majority of the population rarely leave 
their blocks and even when they do steer well clear of City 
Bottom – a few take great exception to the ‘scum’ living 
for free around their homes. It is not unusual for groups of 
citizens to launch attacks against the cardboard cities, using 
ﬁ rebombs or high explosives in an attempt to dislodge the 
residents.
 Conapts
Smaller than city blocks, conapts (connecting apartments) 
are privately owned housing complexes catering to the 

===PAGE 160===
 Mega-City One
159
DP Camps
Displaced Person Camps are a sad fact of life in Mega-City 
One. Vast areas of waste ground are set aside to provide 
temporary accommodation to the millions of homeless 
citizens on the Housing List. Originally set-up after the 
Apocalypse War, the camps’ populations swelled far beyond 
their capacity with refugees from the Necropolis and Second 
Robot War. An average DP camp is built from pre-fabricated 
habitat domes surrounded by electromesh fences and riots 
among inhabitants regularly break out when a lucky citizen 
ﬁ nally gets re-housed.
The  Jungle
The Jungle (or Apetown) is the term given to areas of Sectors 
7 and 20 set aside for genetically modi ﬁ ed primates. The 
Jungle consists of cave-like, low-level apartment buildings. 
When originally unveiled in 2080, the area was a shining 
state-of-the-art conurbation modiﬁ ed for ape usage, including 
swing poles instead of pedways, ropes and climbing bars. 
Within a year, the complex had become one of Mega-City 
One’s worst slums. The tenant apes had little interest in, or 
practical knowledge of, civilisation and had retained many 
of their less appealing habits. Humans are not welcome in 
Apetown and the residents have made it quite clear that 
‘skinfaces’ or ‘pinkies’ will be attacked on sight. The Jungle 
is a law unto itself, where the apes take care of their own 
problems their own way, but so long as the apes remain 
within their borders, the Judges tend to leave them be.
Luxy-Blocks
Luxy-blocks provide the ultimate in housing. A citizen 
fortunate enough to afford a hyperlux apartment has their 
every whim tended to by servo druids, and computers allow 
the resident to control every aspect of their environment. A 
number of apartments remain empty, due to the ramiﬁ cations 
of a spectacular malfunction that occurred with the ﬁ rst ever 
luxy-block, the Komputel. Opening with great fanfare in 
2099, the Komputel took complete and total control of its 
amenities to make life easier for the tenants. Unfortunately, 
the computer began to murder the tenants one by one, 
considering them to be an infestation. Of the thousand 
guests who checked in, only a few managed checked out. 
Memories of this debacle still cause marketing difﬁ culties for 
the luxy-block syndicates.
Rooming Houses
Hotels are common in Mega-City One, ranging from the 
cheap and cheerful bed and breakfast provided by a citizen 
subletting a couple of rooms for the night, to the ultra-
exclusive hovering, four star accommodation of the Twilight 
Rooms. The ‘Armageddon Hotel’ franchise is popular with 
fugitives, as it operates a ‘no questions asked’ policy. A 
more legitimate traveller in need of a room for the night 
can book into one of the many Inn-on-the-Sked motels or 
continue their journey aboard one of the Big Mo Travelling 
Taverns. Sitting at the bottom of the hotel strata, stackers 
are ﬁ lled with tiny sleeping pods each containing one tenant 
and frequented by the dispossessed who have somehow 
managed to scrape together the 20 credits needed to rent 
a pod for a few hours.
The  Maze
The abandoned ruins of the F. Lloyd Mazny Housing Scheme 
lie at the heart of Sector 50. The Maze was opened in 2094, 
boasting that it was the most advanced housing complex 
in the city. In an attempt to keep things ‘interesting’, Mazny 
had developed revolutionary new techniques including the 
animated Escher Hallways, looping Mobius Pedways and 
rotating Klein Plazas. Unfortunately, the tenants found they 
could only navigate their way around the Maze with the aid 
of computer-controlled signposts. Typically, within a week, 
every single signpost had been vandalised and even the 
maintenance droids sent to replace them disappeared, 
lost in the labyrinthine course ways. Unable to cope with 
monitoring ten thousand kilometres of constantly changing 
concourses, the Maze’s master computer crashed, leaving 
the population alone to ﬁ nd their own way out. It took a year 
before the last resident managed to stagger out. The Maze 
remains standing, the adopted home of a small population of 
vagrants and mutants but there are also many tales of alien 
monsters lurking down the twisting hallways, ready to pick 
off the unwary.
 Weather Control
Mega-City One’s weather is under the complete control of 
Justice Department’s Weather Control Station, which hovers 
high above the city and uses a mixture of cloud seeding and 
advanced climatic manipulation to ensure the city below 
gets the weather it needs. For the most part, Weather 
Control ensures that the weather across the city is balmy 
and clear, thereby improving the mood of the citizens but 
Weather Control can create any form of weather conditions 
across the whole of Mega-City One, if it needs to, and even 
localise weather conditions to a sector or street level when 
necessary. Senior Judges can order weather conditions to 
be altered but usually require Sector House sanction from 
the Sector Chief before commands are carried out.
Weather Control was destroyed during the Apocalypse War, 
resulting in arctic conditions for the ﬁ rst time in decades. 
After the war it was rebuilt but it has malfunctioned frequently 
since the war and it is more common for Mega-City One to be 
drenched in rain, pelted by hail or baked in ﬁ erce sunshine 
– again with localisation over certain sectors.

===PAGE 161===
 Mega-City One
160
Weather Control has been known to give instructional, 
guided tours to the meg-schools as part of the ‘Know Your 
City’ syllabus.
West Walls
Mega-City One is insulated from the Cursed Earth by the 
immense West Wall, which runs the entire length of the city 
and is a uniform two hundred metres in height and made 
from 20 metre-thick plasticrete and steel. Fifty gates pepper 
its length, at main sector points, allowing ingress and egress 
to and from the city. Justice Department sentry towers, 
staffed by both Judges and automated weaponry systems, 
linked to Border Control at the Grand Hall of Justice, watch 
over activities on the west side of the wall. The gates are 
controlled by the local sentry towers and each sentry station 
is under the command of a Senior Judge, effectively making 
each sentry point a smaller version of a Sector House 
– complete with holding facilities, interrogation rooms and 
armouries. Justice Department Immigration Of ﬁ ces are 
located at each sentry station, where immigrants from the 
Cursed Earth are interviewed, processed and then either 
granted or denied leave to remain within the city itself. Wall 
Detail is not popular amongst Street Judges as the work is 
often tedious; but it is nevertheless a vital part of Mega-City 
One security and some Judges ﬁ nd it a welcome respite 
from the rigours of sector patrols.
Following the countless attacks and ravages Mega-City 
One has undergone, West Wall has been signi ﬁ cantly 
strengthened and re-armed. Each sentry point is equipped 
with a sonic cannon, street cannon (see page 73), laser 
cannons and missile launchers, trained across the Cursed 
Earth plains. The gates are opened only for scheduled and 
permitted trafﬁ c, although postern gates opening within 
the main gates, allow individuals to approach and undergo 
rigorous processing by the sentry point Judges.
Landmarks 
of Mega-City 
One
In a city as big as Mega-City One, landmarks are everywhere. 
Buildings are thousands of feet high, built in outlandish 
shapes and designs, glitter like jewels amidst the millions of 
kilometres of highways and blaze their names, nicknames 
and slogans like battle cries in neon and LED dozens of 
metres high. Close your eyes, spin around, point and then 
open your eyes and, chances are, you will be looking towards 
a sector’s landmark.
The old landmarks of the pre-Atomic Wars are still there; 
but they are dwarfed by the sheer, outrageous enormity of 
the Mega-City era. All that remains of the Statue of Liberty, 
once one of the most recognisable symbols in the world, 
is a hand bearing the torch on the site where she used to 
stand. The Empire State and Chrysler Buildings, once the 
epitome of skyscrapers, are tiny and insigni ﬁ cant against 
the starscrapers that loom around them. Mega-City One has 
its own landmarks now; its own grand statements and awe-
inspiring feats of architecture. Here are some of the most 
well known.
 Academy of Law
Shaped like a giant Eagle of Justice, the Academy of Law 
is found in Sector 44. Also known as the toughest school 
on Earth, every Judge has spent ﬁ fteen years of their lives 
within the walls of the colossal complex, trained in all aspects 
of bringing justice to the streets of Mega-City One. The 
exterior’s visible edi ﬁ ce is imposing enough, with a grand, 
sweeping skedway leading up to its imposing synthi-marble 
staircase, ﬁ fty-metres wide. But inside, the Academy is even 
more imposing. Only a ﬁ fth of the Academy is outwardly 
visible: the rest is deep underground, reaching down at 
least a hundred storeys. The Academy of Justice is nothing 
less than a city block dedicated to training the toughest law 
enforcers ever known. The building is equipped to withstand 
direct missile strikes, sieges, earthquakes and any other 
assault anyone wants to try to level. No other academy 
comes close to matching its grandeur and everything about 
the Academy of Law signals that this is where the law starts 
and is nurtured.
Aftermath Square
Part of a massive collection of themed plazas located outside 
the Grand Hall of Justice in Sector 44, Aftermath Square is 
dedicated to the memory of the citizens and Judges killed 
under the 100-day rule of the insane Chief Judge Cal in 
2101. In the centre stands the Statue of Fergie, a brutish, 
subhuman resident of the Undercity who played a vital role 
in the ﬁ nal defeat of the tyrant. A more recent addition is a 
memorial to the Mega-City One dead of the Zombie War, the 
Judgement Monument.
Most sectors have some form of Aftermath Square to 
commemorate Mega-City One’s tribulations and Aftermath 
Square in Sector 44 forms the blueprint. Sector 295, for 
example, has its Ground Zero Plaza, where the ﬁ rst nukes 
of the Apocalypse War struck the city. Ground Zero Plaza 
is now a wide, synthi-grassed oval with a mushroom-cloud 
sculpture dominating, carved with the names of all Sector 
295 citizens who perished in that ﬁ rst wave of attacks. A 
quiet, contemplative place, it is one of the few, relatively 
crime-free areas of the entire sector. People can wander 
through GZ-P at night with only a moderate fear of being 
mugged and the Judges who patrol the streets around GZ-

===PAGE 162===
 Mega-City One
161
P deliver exceedingly stern justice upon any who sully the 
tranquillity of the place with their criminal tendencies.
Apocalypse Monument
Located at the very heart of Mega-City One, the Apocalypse 
Monument is dedicated to the four hundred million citizens 
killed in the Apocalypse War of 2104. Built to resemble a 
ﬁ fty metre tall mushroom cloud and emblazoned with the 
slogan ‘Peace to All,’ many of the more conservative citizens 
believe the structure to be in rather poor taste. The annual 
Apocalypse Parade concludes at the monument, where a 
minute’s silence is held to remember the dead. A number 
of citizens who attend the parade are there to celebrate the 
start of the war rather than the end of it – with the harsh 
street ﬁ ghting and constant action, it was the only time in 
their lives when they were not bored.
 Big Smelly
The old Hudson River, completely concreted over before the 
Apocalypse War, is known as the Big Smelly. Dangerously 
polluted and inhabited by rad-rats and other vile critters, the 
Big Smelly was exposed by the Apocalypse War devastation 
in some areas and these are still not concreted over, allowing 
the vileness of the water to permeate into the air. Naturally 
enough kook-groups like the Water-Of-Lifers believe that 
the Big Smelly has healing properties and take to bathing in 
the rancid waters on their high holy days. So far, no serious 
casualties, although Water-Of-Lifers are notorious for their 
stench and occasional bouts of dysentery.
 Empire State Building
Transplanted from New York (now the Undercity) before it 
was concreted over, the Empire State Building was once the 
tallest building in the world. For many years lack of interest 
from all concerned led to the historic building crumbling into 
ruin, as it was dwarfed by the nearby city blocks. By 2120, the 
building was in such a bad condition that a demolition order 
was placed upon it but Otto Sump rescued the aged landmark 
at the very last minute. He spent a fortune on rebuilding and 
reﬁ tting the gutted building, restoring some of its former 
glory. Now a major tourist attraction, visitors ﬂ ock to see re-
enactments of historical events that were supposed to have 
occurred within. The favourite attraction is the ‘Krong Klimb,’ 
a gigantic robot ape slowly scaling the building’s side. For 
an additional Cr. 50, citizens can opt for the Krong Ride, in 
which they are placed into the robot’s giant hand and carried 
all the way to the top. Robot aircraft, designed to resemble 
ancient ﬂ ying machines of the early 20
th Century buzz the 
Krong robot when it reaches the summit of the Empire State, 
creating a thrilling show for those who come to watch. The 
climax is Krong falling to his (cushioned) doom as the ﬁ ghter 
planes ﬁ ll his carcass with lead. Then, with a whine of huge 
servos, Krong gets up and repeats the performance on the 
hour. Fun for all the family!
Unfortunately, the genetically modi ﬁ ed residents of The 
Jungle (see page 159) take exception to the Krong show 
at the Empire State. First, there is the matter of taste; the 
apes just do not see it as funny that a member of their 
species – even a robot one – should be gunned-down for the 
entertainment of others. Second is the issue of rights: some 
of the ape gangs believe that, as the star of the show is a 
representation of an ape, some kind of public performance 
fee should be paid to the Jungle in acknowledgement. So 
not everyone in Mega-City One is particularly enamoured 
with the Empire State Building’s current use.
 Grand Hall of Justice
The central headquarters of the Justice Department, the 
Grand Hall of Justice sits at the heart of Sector 44. The 
Grand Hall houses the of ﬁ ces of the Chief Judge and the 
Council of Five and is home to the central processing nodes 
of MAC. The Hall’s levels are divided among crash dorms 
(temporary sleeping units for Judges); senior Judge of ﬁ ces; 
brieﬁ ng rooms; TRI bays (the largest number of holding 
pens of any Sector House in the city); medical and technical 
laboratories; and vehicle parks large enough to house 
several H-wagons and Manta Prowl Tanks. Most of the 
Justice Department’s command divisions are located in the 
Grand Hall, including Med, Tek and the SJS. The Grand Hall 
is also connected to the largest of ﬁ ve subterranean Tactical 
Command Bunkers, secure facilities acting as headquarters 
in the event of a major attack on the City. The Grand Hall has 
become a tourist attraction, offering the Hall of Heroes, Judge 
Fargo’s uniform and prototype versions of the Lawgiver 
and the Lawmaster, as exhibits for an eager and curious 
public to see up-close. The Black Museum is an even more 
popular attraction, ﬁ lled with artefacts salvaged from the 
criminals who have threatened Mega-City One throughout 
its tumultuous history, including Chief Judge Cal’s brain, 
the remains of Mechanismo 5, the pickled remains of Judge 
Fish, a ﬂ ask of Judge Mortis’s ectoplasm and the living cloak 
of the necromancer Sabbat. 
Martha Chesterton Memorial
Known simply as ‘The Park,’ the Martha Chesterton Memorial 
Park is one of the few remaining large areas of natural 
vegetation in Mega-City One and the only one open to the 
public. It was built shortly after the Atomic War of 2070-71 
by a rich industrialist, Chester Chesterton III and dedicated 
to his wife who was killed in the conﬂ ict. The wily Chesterton 
ensured the Park’s continued existence by stipulating in 
his Will that the Chesterton Foundation make a substantial 
donation to the Justice Department every year. Notorious 

===PAGE 163===
 Mega-City One
162
as a haven for freaks and weirdoes, only a fool stays within 
the conﬁ nes after dark. A multitude of urban myths have 
developed over the years, including rumours that Chesterton 
buried the majority of his fortune somewhere in the grounds 
and a bizarre creature known as The Park Beast prowls 
within, eating unwary citizens. The Justice Department use 
the Park for a variety of training exercises, affording teams 
of second term Judge cadets their ﬁ rst experience of Mega-
City life at its weirdest.
Moonray Tower
One of the city’s tallest buildings, Moonray Tower, the 
headquarters of Moonray Display Inc, is also one of the least 
popular. Colossal lasers project images for pro ﬁ t onto the 
face of the moon, usually advertising for big business and 
corporations. The displays are limited to 12 hours a month but 
because they are spread over many days, spoil the view for 
romantics and moonwatchers. The city’s moon worshipping 
cults such as the Loonies and the Selenites have launched 
terrorist assaults on the Tower to end its blasphemy. Dislike 
of Moonray Display Inc is not con ﬁ ned to the Mega-City as 
the adverts remain a cause of disagreement between the 
governments of Mega-City One and Luna-1.
Speakers Square
Located on one of the plazas of Justice Square, this is where 
citizens can go to speak their minds on any subject without 
fear of arrest. While most who participate do so to let off 
steam about trivial matters that annoy them, others, such 
as the Pro-Democracy movement, use the square as a 
platform to get their controversial views and opinions into the 
public eye. Listeners are normally on hand, interrupting and 
heckling anything that comes out of the speakers’ mouths 
and pointing out inconsistencies in their arguments. Less 
popular speakers are pelted with synthi-fruit or chunks of 
rockcrete in the case of the ‘Necropolis Never Happened’ 
League. Purveyors of these impromptu weapons erect stalls 
close to the plinth (or yak platform, as it is known) and sell 
their wares to the assembled hecklers. There are some 
decent bargains to be had – as long as the Judges don’t 
catch you. A packet of gravel can be bought for as little as 
Cr. 1, whereas mouldy synthi-plums, with maximum splatter 
radius, sell for around Cr. 3 per half dozen and also make a 
tasty snack.
 Statue of Justice
Unveiled to the public in 2099, the original Statue of Justice 
stood a little over 150 metres high and offered an unparalleled 
view over the city. Visitors ﬂ ocked to the viewing areas 
located in the eyes of the statue to admire the view. In 2115, 
ex-Judge Grice led an army of Titan escapees on a vendetta 
against the Judges who had imprisoned them and one of his 
most damaging acts was to demolish the Statue of Justice. A 
new Statue was completed in 2117 but this time was built to 
house the Public Surveillance Unit headed by Judge Edgar. 
Tourists are no longer allowed access to the landmark’s 
interior. The statue has attracted its ﬁ rst share of scrawlers 
in the past, notably pro-democracy fanatics, although its 
most famous scrawler was Marlon ‘Chopper’ Shakespeare 
in the days before he was famed as a powerboarder.
 Statue of Liberty
Now little more than an ancient and broken relic, the Statue 
of Liberty is forever in the shadow of its close neighbour, the 
Statue of Justice and is one of the few remaining constructions 
left from the pre-Mega-City era. The statue lost an arm when 
ex-Judge Grice destroyed the original Statue of Justice 
and, when it was replaced, the Torch of Liberty was recast 
without the ability to illuminate, interpreted by opponents of 
the judicial system as a symbol of the triumph of dictatorship 
over democracy. Total War eventually destroyed the Statue, 
albeit on the second attempt, and all that remains is the torch 
hand, sited on the monument’s original spot.
 White Cliffs of Dover
The White Cliffs were imported all the way from Brit-Cit 
to become one of the Mega-City’s top tourist attractions. 
For a modest fee, sightseers can admire the impressive 
spectacle and take a walk along the coastline or try to spot 
the bluebirds (actually small, ﬂ ying robots – real bluebirds 
have been extinct for decades). Other attractions include a 
regular show performed by ‘genuine’ Brit-Citters including 
dancing chimney sweeps, singing academics and Pearly 
Kings and Queens. The cliffs are regularly scrubbed to repel 
air pollution and this attention to cleanliness often proves 
too much of a temptation to the legions of scrawlers who 
manage to deface the lower cliffside, despite the elaborate 
security measures.
Other Landmarks
Part of the fun of Mega-City One is coming-
up with outlandish landmarks, perhaps based 
on existing, 21
st Century, American eastern 
seaboard icons. Mega-City One is big enough 
and weird enough to host them all. Consider 
where your Judge Dredd campaign is taking 
place, check out some guidebooks on 
the contemporary area and let your 
imagination do the rest.

===PAGE 164===
 Mega-City One
163
Leisure and 
Fun
There is precious little to do in Mega-City One, given the fact 
that robots do all the hard, monotonous and tedious jobs; plus 
the necessary, skilled, lucrative jobs and do them far more 
effectively and cheaply than humans. As a result, citizens 
have abundant leisure time on their hands and all manner of 
daft and dangerous crazes to ﬁ ll the hours between waking 
and curfew.
Entertainment
Robots and computers carry out most of the work in Mega-
City One. The most optimistic statistics put the human 
unemployment rate at a staggering 87% of the population, 
though some sectors have a ﬁ gure as high as 98%. With 
such a dramatic increase in leisure time, boredom is 
obviously a major concern for nearly every citizen. While still 
at Megaschool, all citizens are encouraged to ﬁ nd a hobby to 
occupy their minds. While many choose to take up sensible 
and creative pursuits like painting or kneepad embellishing, 
others enjoy dangerous sports like bat-gliding or skysurﬁ ng. 
The entertainment industry is therefore vast and diverse, 
catering for the varying tastes of 400 million citizens.
Aggrodomes
The ﬁ rst aggrodomes were an abject failure. The idea was to 
charge citizens to come and vent their anger against robots 
in controlled conditions and different scenarios. Citizens 
could beat-up droids, have prolonged and heated arguments 
with debatobots and hurl abuse to their hearts’ content. 
Naturally enough, things got carried away and full-scale riots 
took hold, which required Justice Department intervention to 
resolve. For a while the aggrodomes faltered and died but 
recently they have made a resurgence, albeit with a toned-
down focus on aggression and strict screening policies to 
allow only those who will be able to vent their anger within 
half and hour and feel immediately contented afterwards. 
Judges disapprove of the aggrodomes but know that they 
can serve a useful purpose if properly managed. One hour in 
an aggrodome costs Cr. 25 and the citizen must make an Int 
8+ roll to successfully pass the screening process.
Batting
A common sight in the skies of Mega-City One is the bat-
glider, swooping and gliding around the tops of the city blocks, 
kept aloft by a tiny lo-grav unit strapped to the glider’s chest 
with two wings providing stability. Batting is not as easy as it 
looks and citizens must undergo a six-month training course 
before they can take to the air. Unfortunately, a great many 
lack the patience or the inclination to learn – novice bat-
gliders can sometimes be seen plummeting uncontrollably 
towards City Bottom. Bat-gliders are required to keep to 
the designated batting zones at all times, well away from 
airborne trafﬁ c and other aerial hazards. A popular practice 
was the sponsored bat glide, whereby a large group of virgin 
bat-gliders take to the air, accumulating credits for each 
minute that they manage to stay aloft.
Clubs
Every sector has many downmarket nightclubs such as ‘The 
Rabbit Hutch’ and exclusive, expensive skankeries such as 
‘Planet Airhead.’ The usual Mega-City clubs are bars with 
huge dance ﬂ oors and a vid jock equipped with the latest 
tunes but, as can be expected in a city of 400 million, specialist 
and exotic clubs are not dif ﬁ cult to ﬁ nd. Blight clubs (also 
known as Ugly Hops) are frequented by ‘uglies,’ devotees of 
Otto Sump’s ‘ugly’ fashion craze. Following the imposition of 
a 1,000 credit tax on all ugly products, the blight clubs have 
been forced to cater to a smaller but devoted clientele. The 
‘Ugly Young Things’ and new age ‘Hideous People’ shoogle 
their boogle in the dance cubes and a single drink can cost 
as much as an average citizens welfare payments for a 
whole week. The Ugly Bugs Ball competition is held annually 
to determine the ‘Ugliest Ugly of Mega-City One,’ the prize 
being a year’s supply of ugly preparations. On the other 
side of the club spectrum are the Palais-de-Bops, catering 
for every conceivable mode of dance including ‘ ﬂ ydancing,’ 
where dancers wear adhesive shoes enabling them to shake 
their stuff on the walls and ceilings.
Costa Del Meg
Following the destruction of Mega Miami during the 
Apocalypse War, the Costa Del Meg is now Mega-City One’s 
number one holiday resort. A seventeen-mile long strip of 
beach squeezed between the East Wall and the polluted 
waters of the Black Atlantic, the Costa Del Meg comprises 
funfairs, nightclubs and cheap hotels. The Judges are more 
tolerant than usual, understanding that the citizens’ annual 
holiday to the Costa provides a much-needed break from 
the daily grind of existence. The Costa’s beaches consist 
of chemical sludge and the waters of the Black Atlantic are 
lethal, so citizens must keep their special holiday chem-suits 
zipped up at all times. 
Dramarena
Capable of seating half a million people, the Dramarena is a 
colossal open-air theatre. The circular stage is comparatively 
tiny compared to the size of the audience. The Dramarena’s 
acoustics were disrupted by a terrorist explosion during the 
Christmas Play in 2108, meaning that citizens sitting more 

===PAGE 165===
 Mega-City One
164
than ten rows from the front are completely incapable of 
hearing the performance without audio headsets.
Most Sectors have their own dramarena variant – albeit on 
a smaller scale – and every block has its own dramatorium, 
used for public performances and block assemblies.
Dream Palace
While the average citizen has to make do with ordinary 
dreams that fade with the morning alarm clock, the richer 
classes can visit the exclusive Dream Palaces. With the aid 
of a Total Relaxation Inducer, coupled with charged electron 
bombardments, dreamers can experience their greatest 
fantasies whenever they want, and have them recorded onto 
a Tri-D slug to treasure forever. A less expensive alternative 
is one of the back street ‘dream parlours’ run by racketeers 
and mobsters as a front for their more questionable services. 
Dream parlours employ obsolete or unpredictable equipment 
that produce inferior dreams and run the risk of inﬂ icting brain 
damage or psychological problems upon the user.
Gambling
Nearly all forms of gambling are illegal in Mega-City One 
and even the many Tri-D game shows have to ensure a 
contestant can only win using their own skill or knowledge 
rather than relying on luck or chance. The weekly Megalot is 
the only legal gambling event. Most citizens buy themselves 
a 10-credit ticket, dreaming of matching the 10 numbers 
correctly despite the massive odds against them. Once 
a year, the Megalot holds a ‘Billion Cred Bonanza.’ The 
colossal prize frequently causes mass hysteria with citizens 
selling everything they own in order to ﬁ nance the purchase of 
more lottery tickets. Other citizens are prepared to ﬂ aunt the 
law and visit an illegal bookmaker to try their luck. Gambling 
addicts are prepared to gamble on anything from a couple 
of credits on a back street craps game or the Superbowl, 
to taking out huge loans to wager on robot ﬁ ghts. Events 
specially run by the underworld take advantage of the chronic 
need some punters have to gamble. A particularly odious 
event is ‘rat-baiting,’ held in specially constructed arenas 
along City Bottom. The punters gamble on the outcome of 
a battle to the death between two or more pit-rats selected 
from the packs of mutant vermin roaming the cardboard 
cities. Illegal casinos and gambling clubs thrive. The bizarre 
card game of Tabloo is a favourite but it is a brave citizen 
who is prepared to try their luck at the incomprehensible 
games of Fizbin or Go Johnny Go Go Go Go! Others choose 
to gamble on animated board games such as Take Tower 
or Robopoly. Bingo remains very popular among the elderly 
and many OACs became addicted to the game before it 
was made illegal in the mid 21
st Century. There are always 
criminal elements willing to exploit their weakness. With 
games usually taking place in ruined blocks or in the back 
rooms of their eld-shelts, many bingoholics live to match 
their numbers and shout out ‘block!’ to win some small prize. 
For some poor dears, the excitement of winning is all too 
much and they perish from sudden heart attacks!
Love Boat
Built to resemble an ancient cruise liner, the Love Boat is 
a hovering hotel that caters exclusively for honeymooning 
couples. The Love Boat follows a two-week cruise around the 
more scenic and romantic parts of the Mega-City, taking in 
sights like the majestic Errol Flynn Block and the White Cliffs 
of Dover. The white-uniformed steward droids ensure that a 
perfect romantic atmosphere is maintained at all times. 
Mega-City 5000
This illegal motorcycle race somehow manages to be held 
every year between 5000 of the world’s toughest bikers 
despite the Judges’ best efforts. The competing bikers race 
down Mega-City One’s east coast, stopping for nothing and 
nobody.
Mega-City Chamber of Horrors
Visitors can watch a variety of animatronic android re-
enactments of ancient crimes like the Jack the Ripper 
murders, the Sweeny Todd cutthroat crimes and the 
Hunchback of Knotty Ash.
Megaplex
The Megaplex is based in Sector 7, where citizens can 
pay to send their juves to keep them occupied during the 
long summer break from Megaschool. There are a variety 
of closely monitored activities on offer. Those wishing to be 
the next Jug McKenzie or Chopper can attend ‘Surf Camp.’ 
The less adventurous can spend the whole time watching 
and debating sci-ﬁ  ﬂ icks and writing computer programmes 
at ‘Nerd Camp’, while others can confront their natural 
deformities or personal hygiene problems at ‘Ugly Camp’. 
Popular among the young fatties is ‘Fat Camp’ where they 
can stuff their faces while learning about the various ﬂ ab-
sports and occasionally skinny juves are sent to Fat Camp 
in order to gain a measure of extra weight as directed by 
concerned parents. The Justice Department operates 
two camps of its own – ‘Camp Pal’ entertains the young 
members of the ‘Judge Pal Club’ where they are trained 
in surveillance techniques enabling them to snitch on their 
friends and family to Judge Pal himself. Psi-Division runs 
‘Psi-Camp’, where juves with psi-potential are appraised and 
trained to control their powers. The more promising students 
are inducted into Psi-School.

===PAGE 166===
 Mega-City One
165
Megathon
The annual cross-Mega-City marathon is a colossal event 
that regularly attracts 4 million contestants keen to attempt 
the fortnight long run across the entire city from north to 
south. However, the average citizen is barely ﬁ t enough to 
walk across a room, never mind jog – less than 0.001% of 
the original competitors reach the ﬁ nishing line and some 
are never seen again!
Multimedia
Millions of citizens spend every waking hour glued to 
their Tri-Ds (three-dimensional televisions) and particular 
favourite viewing choices are the quiz shows. Notable quiz-
vids have included ‘You’ve Been Fingered’ (citizens inform 
on their neighbours for big cash rewards), ‘The Density 
Factor’ (stupid questions for stupid contestants) and the 
incredibly tedious ‘Many Questions,’ taken off air before 
the end of the ﬁ rst episode, managing to achieve negative 
viewing ﬁ gures! Human-interest shows are also a big draw, 
if only to reassure the viewer there are citizens who are more 
miserable and worse off than they are. ‘Just Plain Stupid’ 
showcases Mega-City idiocy whereas ‘Pits of the World’ 
makes Mega-City One look like a pleasant place to live. 
‘Who Gives a Damn What You Think?! is an obnoxious vid-
in hosted by Raymondo Tosser. 
The Justice Department also produces a variety of 
programmes intended to discover hidden crimes among 
the Mega-City One populace, ranging from ‘Crime Call’ to 
‘Face the Judge’. The colourful cartoon ‘Judge Fudge and 
his Pals’ caters for pre-school juves, introducing them to law 
and order at an impressionable age. The Mega-City One 
movie industry has suffered badly in competition with Tri-
D and virtual reality but hundreds of ﬁ lms of varying quality 
continue to be released every month, playing in holotheatres 
and hov-ins. Most are mindless entertainment, comedies 
like ‘Bleeding Heart on my Sleeve Babe 27’ and action ﬂ icks 
like ‘Attack of the Pumping Colons’. The modern industry no 
longer has any stars to speak of, for actors of the ability and 
charisma of Conrad Conn and Rocky Vollo are long retired 
or dead, replaced with the pretty but vacant Brick Bridges 
and Johnny Handsome. On the ﬂ ipside of mainstream 
entertainment lurks the ‘Vi’ industry, producing ﬁ lms and 
Tri-D depicting real acts of explicit physical violence and 
bodily torture, ‘The Sappy Valley Massacre’ and ‘Guts and 
Garters’.
Every sector has at least one studio churning-out trashy 
gossip shows, craze shows, hobby shows and re-runs of 
ancient television broadcasts. Soap operas are perennially 
popular, such as ‘Block Enders’ and ‘Prisoner: Iso Cube 
Wing H’. Game shows ﬁ ll the entire airtime output of some 
channels, with games such as ‘You Bet Your Life’, ‘That’s 
My Mutie!’, ‘Who Wants to Be a Squillionaire’, ‘Wheel of 
Misfortune’ and ‘Thank Your Lucky Stars’ broadcasting city-
wide. Live audiences for these shows offer some blessed 
relief and free entertainment and some citizens turn-up at 
the studios day after day to watch their favourite shows 
being made. Some citizens never leave and actively live in 
the studio complexes, sleeping in the seats they will occupy 
when the programming resumes the next day. Some citizens 
have even found themselves vid-stars as a result of their 
dedication, but ‘Jovial’ Jove Jovi, host of ‘Judge Beat’, 
wherein citizens score the performance of Street Judges 
and try to guess the sentences handed-out, was once a 
seat-hugger addicted to the ‘Judge Beat’ series. 
Magazines survive in the 22
nd Century in electronic format 
as vid-zines published on the Megaweb. Now the cheap 
and cheerful entertainment market has moved away from 
the ‘web’ and found a home in interactive Tri-D sets. The 
Megaweb has dedicated itself to more serious and upmarket 
issues such as news (Mega-Times, Mega-City Standard, 
Morning NewsFax) and specialist genres (Eldzines for OACs, 
‘Megapolitan’ for the business-cits, ‘Homes & Humes’ for the 
trendoes, and so on). The largest publishing house in Mega-
City One is Big-1, one of the few businesses to continue 
to produce actual synthi-paper books and magazines. Big-1 
also produces most of the city’s legal comic books (violence 
removed). The editors receive hundreds of art submissions 
every day from citizens who fail to realise that art droids 
do all the work. As with most types of media, sleaze and 
illegality ﬁ nd a way to invade the vidzine market too. Back 
street dealers sell Vidzines in slug format that are then 
slotted into slug-readers translating the data into magazine-
sized images. Any citizen who ﬁ nds copies of ‘101 Actual 
Killings’, ‘How to Dismember a Close Friend’ and ‘Torture 
Magazine’ is required to hand them over to the nearest 
Judge immediately.
Museum of the Mega-Olympiad
Located in the colossal Olympic Stadium in Sector 44, visitors 
can marvel at the statues of previous Mega-City One Olympic 
heroes, watch holotapes of their greatest triumphs or admire 
the portraits of sportsmen who died during the games. A 
small hall devoted to mementoes and artefacts left over from 
old events attracts a small but steady crowd. One interesting 
exhibit is ‘Explosion in a Bus Q’ sculpted by Jacob Sardini for 
the animated Human Taxidermy event. The piece only won 
a bronze medal but the workmanship and placement of the 
controlled explosions remains breathtaking.

===PAGE 167===
 Mega-City One
166
No-Grav Baths
Popular meeting places for Mega-City One socialites, 
business people and gangsters. Powerful gravity neutralisers 
allow the visitors to ﬂ oat freely, ‘swimming’ without water 
while being cleansed by sonic jets positioned along the walls 
and ceilings.
Nudaromats and Nudaramas
Nudaramats are communal, coin-op laundry units located in 
blocks and other areas of sectors. Here, citizens can legally 
disrobe and wash their clothes whilst they wait, usually 
enjoying the strains of mid-20
th Century blues and soul music 
to help while away the minutes.
Nudaramas are enclosed facilities for those who follow the 
naturist craze; again, citizens can legally get naked and 
enjoy all manner of harmless sports without offending the 
more prudish citizens or offering eye candy for Peepers.
Both nudaramats and nudaramas are watched by Judges 
– often from the Wally Squad – as they can be useful places 
for spotting perps with certain distinguishing features. Judges 
are under no compulsion to disrobe themselves, although 
some Judges do take the opportunity to get uniforms cleaned 
at nudaramats before returning to duty.
 Palais-de-Boing®
The miracle plastic, Boing®, offers thrills aplenty in controlled 
conditions and the Palais-de-Boing® franchise provides just 
such a controlled environment. The huge palaces have 
Boing® tubes, sheer drops, Boing®-arenas (for playing 
Boing®-enabled sports) and all manner of apparatus for the 
dedicated Boinger® to enjoy himself. Boinging® anywhere 
but within a Palais carries a hefty iso cube stretch.
Robot of the Year Show
Originally little more than an annual industrial trade event for 
megacorporations to demonstrate the latest developments 
in robotics, by 2099 the Robot of the Year Show had 
become a huge, multimedia event. Interest in robots had 
become intense due to technological advances enabling 
robots to become sentient. Unfortunately, with intelligence 
came resentment towards their human masters and the First 
Robot War broke out after which the show was suspended 
for several years. Despite modern robots possessing less 
autonomous control and intelligence than their 21
st Century 
counterparts, a Second Robot War took place in 2121 when 
the crime lord Nero Narcos turned millions of robots against 
the Judges. The Robot of the Year Show has not been held 
since, fearing threats from anti-robot protest groups like the 
Neo-Luddites.
Shopping
Every post-atomic city block has a shopping mall (shoplex) 
that can take up several ﬂ oors. Lazy citizens can shop 
through their Tri-D set on the home shopping network ‘Vid 
Mark’ but those more willing to travel can visit city block-
sized department stores like the Mosgrove & Thung chain 
or spend a night at the Shoppera. An essential part of daily 
life, shopping has become a hobby for a great many citizens. 
These shoppaphiles are unable to pass a shop without 
buying something, no matter how inappropriate or useless. 
Many shops take advantage of this and employ hustlers to 
persuade shoppers to buy up old or useless stock, cajoling 
passers-by and shaming citizens who are prepared to head 
home with money still in their pockets.
 Skysurfing
Sometimes known as powerboarding, skysurﬁ ng is a pursuit 
that demands great skill and concentration. Skysurfers ﬂ y 
across the city on powerboards, similar to the pre-atomic 
surfboards but ﬁ tted with an anti-gravity drives and fast jet 
motors. Skysurfers are expected to keep well away from air 
trafﬁ c, road networks and pedways but while many juves 
are content to go skyspugging around the city block, others 
are prepared to put in months of practice, able to perform 
breathtaking and spectacular manoeuvres. The Supersurf is 
an annual skysurﬁ ng race that takes place in Oz, attracting 
many would-be surf stars from the Big Meg.
 Smokatorium
Smoking in public has been banned in Mega-City One for 
decades to save credits wasted on healthcare. In later 
years, the sale and possession of tobacco itself was made 
illegal. This left millions of nicotine addicts without their ﬁ x. 
Smokatoriums were constructed to allow them to smoke 
without harming their fellow citizens or the environment 
and hefty taxes imposed on the service are sucked in by 
the Justice Department in return for allowing the facilities to 
remain open. Smokers sit in crowded rooms, puf ﬁ ng away 
inside sealed helmets to prevent others from inhaling their 
smoke. Naturally, the criminal underworld has its own version 
of the Smokatoriums called ‘smoke-easys,’ concealed bars 
where perps light up and enjoy a drink in relative safety 
without the restrictive helmets.
 Sports
The 22nd Century is home to an amazing variety of sports, 
such as:
• American Football has evolved into ‘Smashball,’ whereby 
two teams of cyborgs beat the drek out of each other. 

===PAGE 168===
 Mega-City One
167
• ‘Pinboing®’ players try to maximise their scores by 
manoeuvring themselves across giant Pinboing® 
tables, encased in Boing®. 
• ‘Jetball’ is airborne basketball evolved from the once-
popular 21
st Century Aeroball. 
• ‘Shuggy’ is a snooker-like game played in shuggy 
halls and the focus of annual shuggy championship 
matches. 
• ‘Flab Sports’ involve hyper-obese fatties trying to 
consume more food than their rivals; the sports also 
include Flab Lifting, wherein normal citizens compete 
to lift the most obese fatties higher and for longer than 
their rivals. 
• ‘Blockleaping’ takes on many forms, most commonly 
trying to hit a small net many hundreds of metres below 
or jumping from one city block to another close by. 
• ‘Ultimate Driving’ was a poorly conceived concept, pitting 
hotrodders against the Judges. The organisers should 
have realised that the roads of Mega-City One are far 
too congested to entertain long-distance chases! 
Some citizens learn ﬁ ghting styles or martial arts as a hobby 
but the Justice Department strictly licenses and monitors 
every gym or dojo. Those who become proﬁ cient can compete 
in televised boxing and wrestling matches, though less easily 
satisﬁ ed citizens with a thirst for unbridled violence may 
seek out underground ﬁ ghting dens where brutal contests 
are played out to large, bloodthirsty audiences. Traditional 
ﬁ ghting sports like bare knuckle ﬁ ghting exist alongside ‘bite 
ﬁ ghting’, two combatants tearing at each other’s ﬂ esh with 
razor-sharp teeth, their hands tied behind their backs. 
 Crazes
Combine a city of 400 million bored citizens with 22nd Century 
technology and you have an explosion of oddball leisure 
pursuits unrestrained by physical and moral limitations. While 
many ‘hobbies’ are quite benign and are contained within 
small areas of Mega-City One, others break out into fully-
ﬂ edged crazes and fashions. Most of these social insanities 
are intense but short lived dying out as their practitioners 
latch onto the next ‘big thing’ or the Justice Department 
slaps a ban on it to restore some semblance of social order.
Block Climbing
Scaling the heights of one’s own city block or other tall 
structure, staring death in the face equipped only with 
sucker boots and gloves, brought out the city’s thrill seekers 
who became known by the press as the ‘spidermen’. 
Faulty climbing equipment bought from back street survival 
stores brought the craze to a standstill. Increased Justice 
Department sky patrols around the most popular block 
climbing landmarks have created an obstacle that even the 
most determined of spidermen would be hard-pressed to 
surmount.
 Boinging®
Boinging® is a craze that has refused to die and is just 
as popular in 2124 as it was when the miracle plastic was 
ﬁ rst marketed in 2101. Citizens spray themselves with the 
fantastic ultra-elastic plastic Boing®, which swells on contact 
with air to transform them into human pinballs. The Palais-
de- Boing® offers an ideal place for a citizen to bounce to 
their hearts content. More adventurous Boingers® can try 
their luck on the Pinboing® tables and attempt to obtain the 
elusive title of Pinboing® Wizard. Others are only satis ﬁ ed 
by the ultimate thrill of the outdoor Boing®, jumping off of the 
tallest city block they can ﬁ nd and bouncing around the city, 
causing property damage and loss of life until they are either 
stopped by a Judge’s incendiary bullet or they accidentally 
Boing® right out of the city. Outdoor Boinging® carries a 
prison sentence of 20 years.
Couch Potatoes
A weird hybrid of potato plant and living humanoid tissue, 
couch potatoes were marketed as home companions. The 
creatures drew their life energies from radiation emitted 
from Tri-D screens, growing larger and developing a small 
degree of sentience, able to parrot phrases culled from 
any programme there were subjected to. When the couch 
potatoes began to extend tendrils and start feeding off their 
owners, the Justice Department discovered the creatures 
had developed a low-key psi-talent capable of in ﬂ uencing 
the minds of the more dull-witted and easily suggestible 
of citizens – in other words, about two-thirds of the city’s 
population! All couch potatoes were removed from Mega-
City One and incinerated in Cursed Earth pits.
Custard Pie Throwing
A simple pleasure for simple people, the ancient art of 
custard pie throwing took off in a big way in Mega-City One, 
with street gangs blasting their victims with synthi-custard 
instead of mugging them and Block Wars fought with strong 
throwing arms and pie cannons. At ﬁ rst, the craze appeared 
to be nothing more than harmless, if messy, fun but not 
everybody enjoyed having brand-new clothes covered in 
yellow gunk. Once the disputes broke out, with ﬁ sts and 
guns replacing pies, the Justice Department put an end to 
yet another craze.
Fashion Flowers
When implanted beneath the skin, fashion seeds feed on a 
small portion of the body’s energy stores to blossom into a 

===PAGE 169===
 Mega-City One
168
thick covering of foliage and ﬂ owers. Nobody could disagree 
that the fashion ﬂ owers were a pretty sight but they leave 
their ‘owners’ unable to wear any clothing and vulnerable 
to infestation from Mega-City insect life. Some citizens 
developed the ‘Eden’ complex, believing themselves to be 
not humans but gardens and spent their time lying still under 
the sun, watered by concerned family members until the 
block psychologist locked them away for rehabilitation.
Instant Fuzz
Spray-on body hair cures baldness and hides (some) obesity 
and other undesirable physical features from the public 
eye, replacing them with thick, multicoloured pelts. Not 
surprisingly, Instant Fuzz is not always used responsibly and 
it became a key ingredient in a troublemaker’s survival kit. 
Sprayed directly onto a citizen’s face, the rapid hair growth 
blinds and suffocates.
Kneepads
Easy and comfortable to wear, affordable and available in 
thousands of colours and patterns, the venerable kneepad 
is a standard fashion accessory even for those who do not 
consider themselves trendoes. One of Mega-City One’s 
richest businesspersons is the ‘kneepad baron’ Jackson 
Pusey but his success landed him in trouble with the Judges 
when his wife was kidnapped and Pusey paid the ransom 
– he was sentenced to 5 years for incitement to further 
kidnappings!
Scrawling
Grafﬁ ti is an ancient crime but the art of scrawling (as grafﬁ ti 
is known in the 22nd Century) took on a new dimension during 
the summer of 2103 when Chopper (also known as Marlon 
Shakespeare) challenged the robot scrawler supremo known 
as the Phantom: their goal – to deface the largest and most 
important landmarks in the city, culminating in the Statue of 
Judgement itself. The Phantom threw himself off the Statue 
rather than surrender to the Judges while Chopper himself 
was thrown into an iso-cube. Scrawling continued to be an 
eyesore but it would never again be quite as spectacular.
Smart Sweets
Following on from the success of his ‘ugly’ craze and the 
relative failure of ‘Gunge’, entrepreneur Otto Sump marketed 
Smart Sweets, claiming that they could increase the 
intelligence of those who ate them. Naturally suspicious, the 
Justice Department analysed the sweets and discovered that 
they were no different from any other confectionery. Sump 
was forced to re-brand the sweets. The consequence was 
drastically reduced sales and eventual bankruptcy for Sump.
Spugbug
A popular party game whereby drunken participants call up 
citizens at random from the Citizens’ Directory and try to trick 
them into performing demeaning acts by feeding them lies. 
Several heart attacks and scores of angry complaints later, 
the Justice Department implemented improved track and 
trace computer systems to tail the malicious calls back to 
their source and end the spugbug craze.
Ugly
Otto Sump was the ugliest man in Mega-City One, so ugly 
that his own mother abandoned him on the steps of a face-
change clinic! Sump’s hideous countenance won him 60 
million credits from his appearance on ‘Sob Story’ that he 
put to use opening a chain of beauty parlours. However, the 
treatments transformed the customers into freaks just like 
Sump himself. Instead of being forced to shut down, Otto 
Sump’s little business attracted citizens who had seen and 
liked the unpredictable results of his ‘beauty products’. A new 
fashion craze – ‘ugly’ – came into being. Despite a 1,000 
credit tax imposed on the ugly products, the demand for Otto 
Sump’s anti-beauty sprays and rub-ons has persisted on a 
smaller scale. Gangs of punks called ‘Puglies’ steal money 
to pay for their own, exclusive ugliﬁ cation treatment.
 Umpty Candy
Umpty Candy is harmless confectionery but one particular 
brand, Uncle Umps, proved too good to be true. Though this 
infamous confectionery was a short-lived phenomenon, its 
effects are still being felt twenty years later. Uncle Umps was 
highly addictive! Within days, thousands of citizens were 
buying up entire stocks of Umpty wherever they could ﬁ nd 
it. When some of the Judges began to manifest symptoms 
of Umpty addiction the sweets were analysed and, whilst 
technically legal, were discovered to be the most addictive 
substance on Earth. Umpty was immediately banned and 
remaining stocks destroyed while Uncle Ump, the candy’s 
creator, was exiled into space. Not long afterwards, the 
Mega- City Jong criminal family tracked Ump down and 
forced the candy recipe from him before dumping him out 
of an airlock. With her new-found knowledge, Ma Jong 
established an Umpty black market, pedalling the drug as a 
ﬁ ne powder. Long after Jong’s death, the Umpty trade has 
spread across the globe.

===PAGE 170===
 Mega-City One
169
Food & Drink
Most of the food eaten in Mega-City One is synthetic in origin, 
derived from chemical compounds grown in city block-sized 
vats or reconstituted from recycled waste products. Synthetic 
produce has actually increased choice, presenting diners 
with foodstuffs that could only have been dreamt of a century 
earlier. Designer foods allow manufacturers to make food 
that is tasty, ﬁ lling and nutritious in a single package. Popular 
foods include Bleenies, Chunkies, Elzweltz, Freezy Whips, 
Grool, Grotpot (in various bizarre ﬂ avours), Hagburgers, 
Hagdogs, Hagfries, Hotties, Krispy Snake-Rings, Meatish 
Pie, Mockburgers, Moonz Boonz, Munceburgers, Non-
Meatish Pies, Synthi-Broth and Synthi-Pizza. 
The head-shaped fruit of the munce plant is an essential 
component of most Mega-City foods, grown intensively in 
Cursed Earth agri-farms and then imported into the city, 
deconstructed and transplanted into complex chemical 
matrices. Munce is highly versatile and can be distilled into 
both food and drink – it is the agent that makes synthetic food 
taste like real food. Munce is also a brand in its own right, 
marketed by Amalgamated Munce. Munce Gum is a popular 
confectionery, as is Munska, a sour liquid concoction best 
consumed after one is drunk to really experience that ‘Magic 
Munska’ tingle. Human nature being what it is, some still 
drool after the days when one could suffer the thrill of heart 
disease and obesity (guaranteeing increased Mega Dole 
payments), very dif ﬁ cult when one’s diet is engineered to 
prevent those very problems. Illegal home synthesisers can 
whip up truly fatty snacks in minutes providing that the citizen 
has ﬁ rst managed to procure the expensive raw ingredients 
from the local grub-pusher. Technology can also come to 
the aid of the would-be fattie, with appetite stimulants like 
Podgedrine and metabolic suppressants that can counteract 
the weight-regulating properties of modern synthifoods. 
Garbo Edibles, Sunshine Synthifoods and Amalgamated 
Munce rank among the most powerful food manufacturers 
in the Americas. 
Down the food chain, fast food franchises are found on 
almost every street corner and city block plaza. These 
include Burger Me, Burgostop (a ﬂ oating hovthrough), 
Chuck Chicken, McCruds, Pizza Hovel and Shapiro’s 
Kosher Hottie House. Beverages come in as many varieties 
as food. Alcoholic drinks are legal but only for those who 
have been genetically-screened by their block doctor as 
‘alky-tolerant’ (alcohol will not affect their behaviour or health 
too adversely). Conversely, sugar and caffeine are illegal, 
both stimulants likely to incite excitable behaviour. Popular 
drinks include Bananarak, Doomlager, Dweebo, No-caf, Old 
Spleen, Shampaine, Soy Cola and Synthicaf. 

===PAGE 171===
 Mega-City One
170

===PAGE 172===
 Mega-City One
171
 Organisations
A citizen who is able to ﬁ nd himself an interest in life will quite 
naturally want to get together with other citizens who share 
similar interests. In a city as diverse as Mega-City One, there 
are thousands of clubs and organisations, each with their own 
aims and objectives. Some of these are Justice Department 
approved and organised to keep the citizens out of trouble 
– every city block has its own ‘job club,’ where a citizen can 
go to scan the Megaweb in a largely futile attempt to ﬁ nd 
a job. The ‘Unemployment Club’ conversely, is where they 
can spend the long days scouring the block classi ﬁ eds for 
local, unpaid activities to keep them entertained. Some, like 
the ‘Pals Club’, provide a valuable resource for the Justice 
Department. ‘Vid clubs’ are extremely popular organisations 
and are devoted to Tri-D shows, particularly the soap operas. 
The latter may have millions of members, ranging from the 
mildly interested to the insanely fanatical. Intense rivalry 
ﬂ ourishes between these groups, sometimes culminating in 
physical violence, though most of these ‘anorak packs’ are 
usually content to try to outdo each other by reciting trivia 
and statistics about their chosen obsession.
There are thousands of political parties. Among them are 
pro-democracy agitators who challenge the right of the 
Justice Department to govern their lives. The Total War 
ﬁ asco has brought most pro-democracy groups into serious 
disrepute but a few small, underground groups still remain, 
intent on replacing the Justice Department with a citizen-
elected assembly.
Most political parties are trivial and inconsequential; main 
candidates in the four-yearly mayoral elections usually 
come from groups such as the Ugly Party, the Sensible 
Party and the Silly Party, with others like the Wild Party 
and the Party Party coming near the top of the polls. 
Though the mayor has relatively little administrative power, 
the promise of public exposure is enough to generate a 
ﬂ ood of candidates. No society would be complete without 
criminal organisations. The scum who enjoy suf ﬁ cient 
power (and alibis) not to have to hide from every Judge 
patrol that passes by spend a few hours of the week at the 
local Badfellows (over 400 lodges citywide). Entertained 
by exotic dancers amid high stakes in the Pacino Casino 
or drinking the night away in the comfort of the Greenstreet 
Lounge to the strains of Fink Senattra, the cream of the 
Mega-City underworld trade secrets, hatch new scams and 
size up their competitors. Detailed here are some of the 
more notable Mega-City One organisations active in 2131:
The Ancient Order of 
Freeplumbers
No one remembers exactly how or where the Freeplumbers 
were established. Some say they are the remains of an 
ancient order of religious knights formed during a con ﬂ ict 
in the Turkish Empire, others maintain they rose from a 
group of inbred Brit-Cit eccentrics in the 20
th Century. The 
Freeplumbers are a vast and diverse group, with a lodge in 
every sector. While most Freeplumbers are ordinary citizens 
who meet once a week to take part in a series of ridiculous 
rituals, the secret inner council, the Rubix Chapter, has 
members selected from positions of power and prestige, 
bound by Freeplumber law to help their fellows to achieve 
their goals and by their success furthering the Order’s own 
agenda. The Justice Department keeps a close watch on the 
Freeplumbers, suspicious of any organisation that claims it 
only exists to help Mankind.
Apocalypse Cults
Mega-City One is regularly beset with major disasters that 
leave thousands or even millions, dead. The survivors 
are left traumatised and must cope with their grief and 
loss in their own way. Some become obsessed, forming 
groups to forever relate the traumatic events that caused 
them to come together, only serving to perpetuate their 
misery. Others, such as the Daughters of the Apocalypse, 
adherents to nuclear war fanaticism, discover they enjoyed 
the experience of 2104 so much that they wish to rally for 
another war! Whilst most try to prove that the disasters never 
occurred in the ﬁ rst place.
Citizens Morals Committee
The largest and most vocal of the city’s watchdog groups, 
formed with the co-operation of the Justice Department to 
discuss trends and movements among the populace that 
may constitute a contravention of basic moral principles. 
With at least one Judge appointed to the Committee, the 
CMC has the power to instantly ratify any decision taken to 
outlaw any social activity that is considered a dangerous, 
destabilising force.
FAF
The Fat Abolition Front was set up in response to the activities 
of the League of Fatties shortly after the Apocalypse War. 
Hungry fatties were taking extreme measures in order to 
obtain more than their fair share of food rations. In order 
to satisfy their massive appetites, they raided food convoys 
and storage depots, depriving ordinary citizens days’ worth 

===PAGE 173===
 Mega-City One
172
of food. The FAF rose from the DP camps, their mission: 
to eat the fatties before the fatties ate the city! The Judges 
took a very dim view of this idea and the FAF was quickly 
stamped on. The food shortages are long gone but the FAF 
remains in the form of militant groups intent on sabotaging 
the major ﬂ ab sport events.
Mega-City Animal Liberation 
League
A rather misguided collection of idealists, the Mega-City 
Animal Liberation League is often found picketing outside 
the city’s last few zoos, demanding that the exhibits be 
returned to the wild. Occasionally, the League launches an 
attack to free some of the animals, releasing them onto the 
streets of Mega-City One, only to see their charges shot by 
the Judges or killed on the megways.
Pals Club
Young citizens are encouraged to join the Pals Club (The 
Fun Way To Inform!), an idea initiated by Jura Edgar, the 
former head of PSU. Juves can gain ‘Pal Points’ by providing 
information about any criminal activities carried out by their 
neighbours, family and friends – the more serious the crime, 
the more points awarded. Points can be traded in for anything 
from the latest musi-slug to a brand new powerboard. The 
more patient pals can build enough points to win training 
in advanced surveillance techniques at the Camp Pal 
dome inside the Megaplex. Judge Pal is the public face of 
the Pals Club, a synthetic character whose messages are 
programmed by PSU operatives.
Perp-Aid
A self-help group for potential perps, perps just released and 
sufferers of Petty Crime Addiction. Perp-Aid holds regular 
meetings where perps confess their past crimes, analyse 
them in group therapy and candidly talk about their desires 
to cause further crime. The attendees listen intently and 
then help the perp to overcome their tendencies through 
tough-love and harsh criticism. Perp-Aid has some success 
but is viewed with scorn by Justice Department which, by 
sheer dint of experience, knows the criminal mind far better 
than any ﬂ aky self-helping do-gooders. Most sectors have 
a branch of Perp-Aid which convenes meetings through 
city blocks and in community halls. The Perp-Aid number 
is displayed prominently in telephone booths and a rolling 
advertising campaign on sector TV.
Pro-Democracy Movements
The most vocal of all the political organisations, the Pro-
Democratic Movements (more commonly known simply as 
the ‘Dems’) demand the removal of the Justice Department 
from power and a return to the democratic principles of the 
past. While most groups, including the Democratic Charter, 
the Democratic Coalition, the Freedom League and the 
Sons of the Constitution, were content to demonstrate 
peacefully and attempt to persuade the Judges to step down 
voluntarily, others were more violent in their efforts, like 
the Judge-killing organisation Total War. The Democratic 
Movement’s activities came to a head in 2111 when a vast 
protest march, two million citizens strong, converged on 
the Grand Hall of Justice. Chief Judge Silver authorised 
Judge Dredd to stop the march by any means necessary. 
Dredd successfully undermined the protest, resulting in an 
embarrassing ﬁ asco for the Dems. Following Necropolis 
when the Judges slaughtered 60 million citizens under the 
inﬂ uence of the Sisters of Death, a vast referendum was held, 
its question: should power continue to lie with the Judges or 
the democrats? While it was obvious that the majority of the 
citizens did not care one way or the other, the vote turned 
out in the Judges’ favour.
Subsequent to the ﬁ rst wave of democratic support, the Total 
War movement took drastic action, detonating several nukes 
around Mega-City One in an outrageous attempt to force the 
Justice Department into a climb-down. Naturally enough, the 
ringleaders of Total War were brought to justice but if they 
believed their cause would win support, they were wrong: 
with hundreds of thousands left dead, dying and homeless, 
public sympathy waned rapidly, leaving the pro-democracy 
cause in almost total disarray.
Religious Groups
The ofﬁ cial religion in Mega-City One is the Church of 
Grud the Avenger, a bizarre combination of Christianity 
and aspects of 20
th Century popular culture founded on the 
principles of the Original Holy. Bishop Desmond Snodgrass 
represents the Church but his status as a simp does more 
harm than good for the cause. There are a multitude of cults, 
founded on all manner of icons from a charismatic pongo 
after an easy credit, to the downright bizarre like the Branch 
Moronian cult, who are so devoted to the idea that ‘ignorance 
is bliss’ that they undergo a series of lobotomies until their 
intelligence ranks alongside a munce plant. 
The Sisters of Grud are not afﬁ liated with the Church of Grud 
but an order of females who celebrate celibacy by stealing 
cars and taking drugs – anything to take their minds off 
men! 
Sponts Anonymous
Sponts Anonymous ‘Sponts’ or Spontaneous Confessors, 
are a major headache for the Judges. Overcome with 
feelings of existential guilt, certain citizens feel compelled 
to unburden themselves by confessing to a multitude of 
real or imaginary crimes whenever they encounter a Judge. 

===PAGE 174===
 Mega-City One
173
Sponts Anonymous is an organisation set up to try to aid the 
unfortunate sufferers, holding counselling sessions intended 
to boost a spont’s willpower so that they can resist the 
temptation to confess to future, imaginary felonies.
Bringing 
Mega-City One 
to Life
A key challenge for any Judge Dredd Referee is in bringing 
Mega-City One to life. The problem is one of scale: Mega-
City One is a vast metropolis – too vast to easily contemplate 
(and evinced by the city’s very citizens who succumb to 
Future Shock) and certainly too vast to describe in sufﬁ cient 
detail.
The key to success is to paint the Mega-City One canvas in 
broad strokes: Everything is BIG. Consider, for a moment, 
the largest city centre on Earth you have ever been to. Now 
imagine, soaring far above you, city blocks that are not 
merely hundreds of metres high but well over a kilometre and 
a half. There are not just a few blocks like this but thousand, 
all around you, as far as the eye can see, of varying sizes, 
shapes and conﬁ gurations but each one immense. Looking 
down on the city, it is as though some colossal spider has 
descended on the city and strung its web between the city 
blocks in an intricate, fractal-like pattern, designed not for 
catching ﬂ ies but humans. The highways lock the blocks, 
districts, plazas and sectors together but also divide them. 
The roads hum ceaselessly – even at night – and there is 
never a lull in the noise of trafﬁ c, sirens, blasts of advertising 
music or the screams of the sorry and the sorrowful. And, 
carving through the city in an almost straight line, bisecting 
it like a length of razor wire, is the Superslab, the longest 
urban roadway on Earth, its dozens of lanes crammed full 
of fast-moving vehicles on autopilot. It throbs like a vein, the 
trafﬁ c pumping through the body of the Mega-City, never 
pausing, never ceasing.
Plunge down, now, between the blocks and megways and 
hit the dense shadows of City Bottom; the covered and 
forgotten streets and avenues of the old American cities. 
Looking up from City Bottom, the sky is barely visible 
between the towering blocks and is further blocked off by 
the intricate maze of roads, slipways and megways that 
carry the city’s traf ﬁ c from sector to sector. Hovercars and 
sky truks zip overhead as thousands of other citizens mill 
about you, all pushing and jostling to get to wherever it is 
they are going. The only true solitude is to be found within 
your own apartment, within one of the mile high city blocks. 
Small wonder so many go Futsie every year. The smallest 
shopping malls are multi-levelled affairs that dwarf anything 
found in the 21
st Century, whereas the road systems are 
suspended in the sky between city blocks and are jammed 
full of traf ﬁ c moving at speeds of over 150 kilometres per 
hour – if it has not been halted in one of the eternal traf ﬁ c 
jams that plague the city. Past disasters have wrecked huge 
swathes of Mega-City One and slain millions in their wake. 
Yet on every street corner, in every block and within every 
mall, you might ﬁ nd a Judge, a ruthless law enforcer ready to 
spring into action at any time to clamp down on the slightest 
infraction of the judicial system.
Gaining Focus: Sector Level
It is recommended – make that highly recommended – that 
you choose a sector and con ﬁ ne your attention to it. Make 
the sector and the Sector House the base for your Judges. 
Sectors are cities in their own right, some are huge but many 
are small – and with three hundred and ﬁ ve to choose from, 
you can be as big or small as you like.
But, by concentrating on a single sector, you can localise 
your action. Every sector has certain common elements, 
which are listed below, along with the some questions to ask 
yourself as you develop the Sector:
Answering the above questions will help you get a feel for 
your sector. It does not need to be too detailed to begin with; 
a large amount of the fun is exploring the sector through the 
visors of the Judges and revealing details steadily as they 
interact with the citizens of the sector and get involved in 
crimes and investigations. Let the sector develop at its own 
pace, with each game session or couple of game sessions 
focusing on one area or theme at a time.
Do not be afraid to introduce strangeness or weirdness – but 
keep things relatively restrained; too much weird becomes 
boring very quickly, so reserve strange and supernatural 
events for every-now-and-again and avoid having Block 
Wars every other week.
Roll-up and flesh out a handful of major Non-Player 
Characters: regular petty crime addicts; block reps and 
leaders; the Sector House staff; major crime figures and 
so on. Drop the names into play frequently but only bring 
out these characters when there is a genuine need for 

===PAGE 175===
 Mega-City One
174
Common Elements Questions to Ask Yourself
Sector House • Who is the Sector Chief? What is their history? What is their line in discipline?
• Who are the heads of the Tek, Psi and Med Divisions operating from the Sector House?
• Who are the notable Judges from each of these divisions and within the Street Division?
• Does the Sector House have any special cases or operations underway? 
What ops has it had in the past?
• Is the Sector House the focus for any special or secretive development work 
licensed by the Grand Hall of Justice?
• What is the Sector House’s relations like with the blocks of the sector, the 
various groups and associations and even the criminal fraternity?
Sector Secretariat Who is the sector representative to the Mayor’s Of ﬁ ce? How well does he or she 
get on with the Sector Chief? Is there any known corruption in the Secretariat? 
Should the Sector House be investigating – in fact, is it doing so already?
City Blocks How many major city blocks does the sector have? 2d6+4 is a good way to ﬁ nd out 
but are there more or less than this?
• What are the city blocks’ names? Use current TV, ﬁ lm, music and political 
names as inspiration; give each block a character that ﬁ ts roughly with the 
person the block is named after.
• Which blocks are antagonistic towards each other? When was the last Block 
War? Is another one due? Who are the troublemakers and petty power bases 
in the blocks? Do Judges need to get involved? Have the blocks become the 
focus of Lemming Syndrome, Rumour Syndrome or Futsism recently? Do the 
criminal gangs have controlling interests in any of the blocks?
Hospitals Every sector has 1d6 hospitals; are these attached to a city block or are they 
independent? Are hospitals dealing with any major diseases or conditions 
presently? What are relations like with the Sector House? Are any perps in a 
secure hospital wing awaiting transfer to the cubes? If so, what is their condition 
and is there anyone waiting to spring them free?
Malls Every block has its own mall but are there any mega-malls – city block-sized 
shopping areas that never close and sell everything under the sun? 
• Who runs the mart? Are the criminal gangs involved in any way? 
• What peculiar things can be bought in the malls that cannot be found in any 
other sectors? What are they? Are they illegal?
• Are any of the marts dangerous – perhaps in fear of collapse or a ﬁ re risk? 
Think of all the tens of thousands who visit the malls everyday.
Amenities Every sector has a Palais-de-Boing®, a dramarena, perhaps a dreamarama, a face-
change clinic and so on. What unique leisure amenities does the sector have? Are 
any old crazes still active in the sector? Are there active fatties and uglies? Are there 
any new crazes starting that originate in your sector? Your imagination should run riot 
here: nothing is too strange or bizarre. Every sector has a studio producing community 
programmes. What is the station called? What is its output? Who are its stars? What are 
the top-rated shows? Are there any scandals associated with the studio, programmes 
of stars? What gimmicks do the studios like to run? Has anyone killed or been killed, on 
air as part of a programme? Is there a likelihood of this happening?
Major Thoroughfares What are the names of the major thoroughfares (meg- and skedways) – use similar 
naming conventions to the city blocks. What are the local trafﬁ c conditions like? Are 
there any nasty accident black spots? What is highway piracy like in the sector? 
Are there any lengths of highway with signiﬁ cant minimum speed limits? Are there 
deep, dangerous tunnels passing under the city blocks? How close is the sector to 
the Superslab? Is the sector a backwater area because of trafﬁ c conditions or is it 
booming because of them?

===PAGE 176===
 Mega-City One
175
Local Skeds and Over/Underzooms Local highways are named just like the major highways but after z-list celebrities 
and minor ﬁ ctional characters. How busy are the local skeds? What plazas do 
they adjoin? Do they form any interesting patterns or con ﬁ gurations? What are 
the accident rates like? Who are the regular mopad owners who cruise around 
the sector?
Ruins How was your sector affected during the various wars and disasters that have hit 
Mega-City One? Where are the ruins and radpits? How extensive are they? What 
secrets have they thrown-up? Who are the denizens of the ruins? What are crime 
levels like? Has disease or radiation sickness affected nearby blocks or other 
settlements? How frequently are patrols? Anyone gone missing there recently? 
Are there any construction works underway to make the ruins habitable again? If 
not, why not?
Undercity/City Bottom What are the old areas buried beneath the plascrete of the new city? How bad/
crime-riddled is city bottom in your sector? Who are the denizens? What are crime 
levels like?
Groups, Sects and Societies What groups represent the following:
• Political parties.
• Religious sects.
• Craze societies.
• Sports societies.
• Hobby societies.
• Self-help groups (Perp Aid?).
• How legit are these groups? Do they front or harbour criminal interests? Are 
they antagonistic towards each other (most are, for some reason)? Do they 
dominate in any particular blocks? Are they widespread across the sector? 
Have they wider city afﬁ liations or are they purely local?
• What are their relations with the Sector House?
• What crazes or behaviours are they responsible for?
• What are their rituals? When – and where – do they meet?
Criminal Gangs Every sector has its criminal gangs, despite Justice Department’s best efforts to 
squash them.
• How many gangs are there? 1d6 is a good number to begin with.
• What are the gangs called? How many in each gang?
• What areas do they control? Are they block-based, mobile or control non-
block districts?
• What rackets do they control? Have they any specialisations?
• Who are the bosses of each? Who are the henchmen and who are the local 
heavies and hitmen?
• Do the gangs use psykers and/or blitzers?
• Are the gangs human, mutant or genetically modiﬁ ed creatures?
• Are the gangs allied or enemies? If enemies, when did they last war? Is a 
war brewing? Should the Judges intervene or is the Wally Squad in there 
already?
• Do the gangs have ties beyond the sector? If so, with whom?
• Have the gangs been involved in any really serious crimes or are they 
concerned with petty moneymaking?
• Who are the inside men and informers? Which Judges do they serve? Can 
they be trusted?
• How far have the gangs managed to corrupt the local Secretariat and other 
public administration ﬁ gures? How about the Judges? 
Common Elements Questions to Ask Yourself

===PAGE 177===
 Mega-City One
176
them. Recurring characters, villains and perps are great 
fun but need to be used sparingly so that familiarity does 
not breed contempt.
Rotate the Judges through different areas of the sector in 
different watches. One session they will be on traf ﬁ c detail; 
the next on block patrol. After that, a Crime Blitz in one of 
the conapts or maybe crowd control at the sector’s Fatty 
Of The Month parade. As they rotate through details, take 
the opportunity to add a little more detail to the area they 
ﬁ nd themselves in. But do not feel that every detail needs 
to be rushed or explained. Build the sector detail steadily, 
watch-by-watch and the Judges will grow with that detail 
and suggest details that you can incorporate at your leisure, 
later.
Finally, whilst keeping it local, do refer to what might be 
happening elsewhere in the city. How does your sector 
respond to a citywide crisis of the like found in the major 
Judge Dredd stories, like Necropolis? In and around the 
massive stories are the stories of individual sectors and 
Judges (see the Judge Dredd story ‘The Pit’ for a fabulous 
sector-level story-arc that can be the inspiration for your 
own adventures). Use them sparingly but get your Judges 
involved in them – that is how they make their names and 
become heroes…
Beyond Mega-
City One
Mega-City One is the largest and possibly the most 
dangerous city on planet Earth but a whole world awaits 
those willing to leave its walls. A great deal of travel takes 
place in 2131, with citizens of all nations taking vacations 
and business trips to other cities and settlements strewn 
across the war-torn planet.
 Antarctic City
The Antarctic Treaty of 2084 gave six global powers joint 
jurisdiction over the Antarctic Territories and they consider 
Antarctica prime estate with a lot of development potential. 
Though ofﬁ cially bound to provide assistance to delegates 
from each member city-state, they continually jostle for 
a stake in Antarctica’s rich mineral resources, the reason 
why Antarctic City exists, surrounded by inland mining 
platforms run by close-knit communities. Some outposts 
like Adamson are jointly worked by multiple city-states, 
while others are distrustful of foreign workers and insist on a 
population native to the city-state with controlling ownership, 
as is the case for Ciudad España. All Antarctic habitats are 
enclosed from the elements and newcomers are put through 
intensive decontamination, resulting in a sterile environment, 

===PAGE 178===
 Mega-City One
177
conducive to healthier living and better working conditions, 
unhampered by sick days. Not all of Antarctica’s surface is 
covered in ice – global warming has exposed landmasses 
unseen for millions of years. A world famous vacation resort 
called ‘Winter Wonderland’ occupies one of the larger ice-
free coastlines.
 Brit-Cit
Brit-Cit extends from Cornwall to Dover and north to the 
Watford Gap. Once a close ally of Mega-City One, Brit-Cit’s 
refusal to give military assistance during the Second Robot 
War of 2121 has prompted a cooling off of their relationship 
but the Black Atlantic Tunnel linking both cities serves as 
too strong a symbol of their long-term friendship and mutual 
dependency for either city to remain ambivalent for long. 
The Brit-Cit Justice Department operates from the New Old 
Bailey in Brit Central and is governed by the Parliament of 
Judges. While Street and CID justice personnel are recruited 
from the general populace, it is extremely difﬁ cult for them to 
achieve any signi ﬁ cant rank unless they have the ﬁ nances 
to purchase a promotion or are members of a Masonic 
fraternity. The upper levels of Brit-Cit Justice are riddled 
with competing secret societies, resulting in confusing and 
contradictory orders ﬁ ltering down to the lower ranks.
Brit-Cit shares very close ties with Mega-City One following 
Dredd’s visit there during the Doomsday Scenario. Even 
before then, Brit-Cit and Mega-City One have co-operated 
in knowledge exchanges for their judicial systems and the 
shared custody of the Atlantic Tunnel, with the undersea 
city of Atlantis providing the half-way point between Mega-
City One and Brit-Cit jurisdictions. Both cities have legal 
rights within Atlantis, allowing crimes to be investigated and 
sentences passed by either city’s Judges, depending on 
who is ﬁ rst to investigate the crime.
 Cal Hab
The Caledonian Habitation Zone (Cal Hab) is owned by Brit-
Cit and stretches from the Orkadian Wastes in the north to 
the southern Dumfries Estate on the Allotment border. It has 
become a dumping ground for the world’s toxic and nuclear 
waste. Cal Hab is divided into six Estates – the Highlands 
(incorporating the Orkney Isles), Angus, McLearance (in 
Orkadia), the Borders, McTav and Dumfries – each owned 
by a Laird (land-owner) who is paid danger money to live 
within Cal Hab borders. The Lairds joined forces to fund the 
construction of the ‘Spirit in the Sky,’ a low-orbital satellite 
broadcasting mental propaganda designed to pacify the 
local Scots. The Spirit was destroyed in 2116 and now the 
Lairds hide inside their castles, fearing for their lives.
 Ciudad Barranquilla
Ciudad Barranquilla or ‘Banana City,’ is one of the few 
conurbations to have survived the Atomic War without any 
change made to local government or social policy. Long 
before US President Booth came to power, the Barranquilla 
Federal Government was deposed by the Juez (Judges) 
who quickly became the Ciudad’s most feared criminals. 
The ‘Banana Judges’ were the ruling class of Barranquilla 
society and anybody could bribe their way into the Justice 
Department. Banana Judges had the power of life and death 
over the citizens, a status that many took sadistic delight in 
enforcing. Judges spent their days in the gilded halls of the 
Grand Hall of Justice passing sentences on those unable to 
bribe their way out of the iso-cubes or patrolling the streets 
on their ciclón (cyclone) bikes. The Banana Judge tyranny 
was curtailed with Mega-City One’s cunning involvement in 
regime change which brought in a puppet Chief Judge loyal 
to Mega-City One – but simultaneously ridding the city of its 
corrupt oppressors.
 Ciudad España
In the 22 nd Century, terrorists now run the country that was 
Spain from the city of Ciudad España and it is a city where 
only the wealthy and corrupt are welcome. The architecture 
is extraordinary and the rents are high for Ciudad España 
is controlled by the Empresario, a syndicate of crime lords, 
drug barons and bent businessmen who spend their meetings 
trying to swindle territory from their fellows when not plotting 
their murder. The Empresario’s days are spent sucking in proﬁ t 
from every racket under the sun. It has little time or interest in 
the affairs of the majority of the Spanish people who do not 
aspire to bootlicking and stabbing their way into power. In the 
mid 21
st Century, Spanish perps had cheated their way into 
political power, knowing that such an esteemed position would 
leave them immune to criminal prosecution. The new status 
quo has remained unchallenged for over a century.
 East-Meg Two
East-Meg Two (also known as Mayexa, ‘the stepmother’) 
is the last surviving Russian Mega-City. It borders Lake 
Baikal, the deepest freshwater lake in the world. As with 
elder sibling East-Meg One, East-Meg Two eliminated the 
street gangs and Ma ﬁ a inﬂ uence, instituting a successful 
Judge System ruled by a Supreme Judge and rati ﬁ ed by 
the 32-strong Diktatorat council. The Judges control the 
citizens with an iron grip, augmented by the secret police of 
B-Division and the Psi-Korps who can detect disquiet among 
the peoples’ minds. Needless to say, the populace remains 
relatively placid for a quick death outside in the Siberian 
Wastes awaits voices of dissent.

===PAGE 179===
 Mega-City One
178
 Emerald Isle
Emerald Isle is a theme park that covers the island of Ireland, 
playing to racial and cultural stereotypes concerning the Irish 
people. After the Atomic War, Brit-Cit megacorporations 
sponsored Ireland’s reconstruction. With huge pro ﬁ ts in 
mind, the Emerald Isle theme park was born, employing the 
locals to dress up as national stereotypes and behave like 
drunken idiots among prefabricated ‘authentic’ Irish villages, 
supping Guinness from real pint glasses and quafﬁ ng spuds 
(replica potatoes) down at the local public house when they 
were not otherwise propping up fences along country lanes 
and cheerfully spouting rubbish at anybody who happened 
to pass by.
 Euro-City
Euro-City is the capital of the EEE (the East European 
Enclaves, incorporating Ciudad España, Ciudad Puerto, 
Euro-City, the Ruhr Conurb and Vatican City). Euro-City is a 
melting pot of EEE member-races. By law, the only language 
that may be spoken within city limits is French, a policy that 
lands Euro-City an annual ﬁ ne for adhering to EEE ‘Open-
Culture’ regulations. The French of 2131 are a stubborn 
people who take great pride in their national identity.
 Hondo City
Hondo City is the most technologically advanced city on 
Earth. It is a land where glistening towers loom over rice 
paddies and ancient religions exist comfortably alongside 
biotechnology and gang violence. Buddhists meditate in 
virtual nirvana cybertanks while around the corner Yakuza 
gangsters are ﬁ tted with cyber-implants as a reward for 
loyalty to their masters. Hondo industry prides itself on its 
cutting edge technologies, the envy of the world. Business 
leaders are so wealthy and powerful that they are now known 
as shogun, the old Nipponese name for warlord. Virtually 
every conurbation on Earth employs Hondo technology at 
home and in business. Raw materials are produced from 
recycling plants or, in the case of metal ores, mined from 
the manganese deposits off the coast. Hondo’s ultimate 
industrial achievement is the creation of atsui-ishi, gigantic 
nuclear power stations carved into captured asteroids 
anchored in geo-stationary orbit over the Northwest Paci ﬁ c. 
The energy generated cannot be beamed directly to Hondo 
City, hence superbattery tankers store the power inside 
city block-sized capacitors, carrying the charge down to 
Earth where the capacitors are hooked up to coastal power 
stations. Ironically, Hondo invented the Power Towers, the 
geo-thermal power stations that light up many global Mega-
Cities, but cannot itself beneﬁ t from the technology because 
of the risk of triggering major earthquakes.
 Indo City
The one unifying factor shared by all the Indian subcontinent’s 
cities is a massive ﬁ nancial debt to global super-states 
Sino-City Two, Brit-Cit and Mega-City One. This debt was 
greatly increased by the Great Droughts of 2072 and 2086 
which ruined the Indian economy. Arguments broke out 
among the larger Indian cities as to who was to blame for 
not having responded quickly enough to the environmental 
crisis. The War of Blame, an Indian civil war, began in 2093 
and lasted until 2101 when the Indian cities sued for peace 
and declared themselves sovereign states. Relief programs 
offered by Mega-City One and Brit-Cit were rejected. On top 
of this crisis is the real threat of invasion from the northern 
Stani-States.
 Luxor City
Regarded as one of the Four Wonders of the modern 
world, Luxor City is the Egyptian Mega-City. Luxor City is 
a stunning symbol of the new Egyptian Empire for the city’s 
walls are all enclosing and meet in a sharp apex, forming a 
pyramid around Luxor. It is said the wall is strong enough to 
protect even against nuclear attack and is also covered with 
solar collectors. Every dawn, the collectors activate, their 
overseers entreating the sun god Ra to provide the City’s 
daily energy needs.
 Mega-City Two
Once a shining example of American technology, Mega-City 
Two came under siege from millions of zombies in 2114 
and had to be annihilated in a desperate effort to purge it 
of the undead. Prior to that, the city was devastated by the 
2T(FRU)T plague, which turned huge numbers of citizens 
into mindless cannibals.
In 2115, Hondo City purchased California at great cost – the 
rebuilding of Mega-City Two had begun.
 Oz
Australia is the land where the sun never stops shining, the 
barbeques are kept blazing night and day, smiles are free 
and the Thunderchunder ﬂ ows as freely as Murrumbidgee 
River. Oz leads the world in Tri-D exports (with classics like 
Rolf’s Hairy Hospital, The Folks over the Fence, Killer Koala 
Killer and Ripper Face-Jobs). Eighty percent of the total Oz 
population lives in and around the Sydney-Melbourne Conurb 
located on the south-east coast but Oz is a multicultural 
society home to Sino, Indian, Greek and African immigrants 
as well as the native Abbos who live on The Blue, the zone 
between Oz and the edges of the Radback. However, 
immigration laws were repealed in 2103 with the intention 
of stemming the rising problem of overcrowding. Oz Judges 

===PAGE 180===
 Mega-City One
179
are volunteers – male or female, any age over 16 – in fancy, 
short-sleeved uniforms. Compared to the Mega-City One 
Judges, the OzCops seem unbelievably undisciplined, 
amoral (OzCops may consume alcohol and have sexual 
relations) and easy-going but in fact are a highly ef ﬁ cient 
and popular section of the community, their motto – ‘When 
we shoot, we smile!’ OzCops get about the Conurb on Trikes 
(three-wheeled motorcycles) and report into the Grand Hall 
of Justice and Leisure Dome at Paul Hogan Plaza.
 Simba City
Africa was devastated when the Credit Wars of the late 
21
st Century (a refusal to repay the crippling debts owed 
to the Western Mega-Cities) led to nuclear war and many 
of the major African states were dissolved. Dozens of 
governments control sections of the continent under wildly 
differing philosophies and beliefs including capitalism, Islam, 
the law of might, free trading zones and development areas. 
To aid in reconstruction, the Pan African Compromise was 
reached, allowing for free travel and trade between many 
of the areas, with a Judge force based out of Simba City, 
though many states refuse to recognise their authority.
 Sino-City Two
Sino-City Two is the world’s premier business centre and 
the location of the Global Stock Exchange and Commerce 
Centre (GSECC), based in the Sun Tower in Kowloon 
District. Sino has ﬂ ourished in the business arena while 
other major cities have suffered recession and political crisis. 
Quick to take advantage of the world’s markets, the Sino 
Loan Syndicates have buffered the economies of countries 
who would otherwise have collapsed into bankruptcy. Most 
of the second-shelf city-states are now buried within Sino-
City Two’s pockets. Occasionally, Sino-City will request that 
some of the indebted states return the favour by carrying 
out espionage duties against enemy cities. The successful 
completion of a favour is rewarded by a small reduction from 
the unpaid debt.
 Texas City
In 2083, Mega-City Three sought independence. Up to 
that time it had existed as a satellite state of the two other 
American Mega-Cities, remotely administrated by Chief 
Judge Goodman from Mega-City One and the Chief Judge of 
Mega-City Two. Three years later, at the conclusion of what 
is now known as the Second American Civil War, Mega-
City Three was ﬁ nally granted sovereignty and re-branded 
as Texas City. As Tex himself might say, ‘We beat them 
a-comin’ and a-goin’!’ Texas City is a sight to behold. The 
surrounding hills bow down to a skyline packed with imposing 
buildings decorated with massive symbols of Texan ideology 
and the Lone Star Building is surmounted with a ﬁ ve-pointed 
rockcrete star. The Ten Gallon Power Station shelters 
under a steel Stetson while the city’s greatest structure is 
Everest Oil Tower, the tallest man-made structure in the city, 
complete with its own snow-cap. The most scenic way to 
approach Texas City is by steamboat across Lake Louisiana. 
As tourists disembark, their eyes are drawn up and up to 
the ﬁ rm but friendly face of Tex, a two mile tall statue of 
Texas City’s semi-mythical avatar. The City’s perimeter is 
protected by a network of forts and patrolled by armoured 
prairie wagons.
Other Places 
of Interest
None of the following localities are Mega-Cities but have 
made their presence known in global politics for one reason 
or another:
 Atlantis
The 3,000 mile long Trans-Atlantic Tunnel (sometimes 
known as the Harrison Tube) links Brit-Cit to Mega-City One, 
jointly-administered by the cities’ two justice departments. 
The city of Atlantis is the central of six service plexes – vast 
underwater service stations built at regular intervals along 
the Atlantic tunnel. The primary local industry is tourism and 
thousands of visitors ﬂ ock every day just to see the Fish 
Feed, when tonnes of waste foodstuffs are dumped out of 
an airlock, attracting mutated marine wildlife like the Spiny 
Neon Turbot, the Duck Billed Rak ﬁ sh, the Poisonous Star 
Spider and, most famous of all, the vast Coral Ray, a giant 
manta covered head to tail in living coral.
 East-Meg One
The Russian super-state Located around Omsk was 
annihilated during the Apocalypse War of 2104. Years 
later, the hardy survivors began to rebuild their beloved city 
under a foolish project known as Phoenix. The East-Meg 
bombsite was highly radioactive, resulting in a high turnover 
of construction personnel and powerful magnetic ﬁ elds 
caused construction robots to malfunction, meaning most of 
the heavy work had to be accomplished by hand. The ghosts 
of those who died during the war still haunt the work sites, 
their chilling screams working to slowly drive the workers 
away. In extreme instances, the paranormal furies manifest 
as extreme poltergeist activity, sometimes creating spates 
of spontaneous human combustion among the terri ﬁ ed 
workers.
 Mediterranean Free-States
The Free-States are a sovereign nation, a series of linked 
ﬂ oating cities in the Ancient Sea, built from materials 
scavenged from abandoned coastal settlements. The 
Free-States are inhabited by refugees, political exiles and 

===PAGE 181===
 Mega-City One
180
dissidents. The Free-States are regarded with contempt, 
little more than pirates or a dangerous, political powder keg.
 Uranium City
A vast mining colony built in the Alaskan tundra, governed 
by the Shareholders who live in the Core. The miners are 
controlled by a combination of emotion-regulating drugs in 
their food and subliminal images on their vid-screens. The 
Uranium City Justice Department was initially recruited from 
Inuit natives but were eventually replaced by simple-minded 
and heavily-armed robots.
 Vatican City
A dark, forbidding citadel, Vatican City is the headquarters 
of the Church of the Original Holy. Any and all heresies 
are dealt with swiftly and effectively by the black-garbed 
Inquisitors; the Vatican Judges. The Inquisition proudly 
boasts that they have never executed an innocent person for 
all of their victims have confessed to something before their 
sentence is passed. The Pope sees it as his Grud-given duty 
to interfere in world affairs and employs a number of special 
operatives to do his bidding across the globe.
 Space Colonies
Mega-City One has several territorial interests beyond Earth. 
A small ﬂ eet of Justice Department ships patrol the solar 
system’s borders and shipping lanes, ensuring pirates are 
kept to a minimum and alien invasion ﬂ eets are forced away 
altogether. A giant command satellite, known as Justice 
3, constantly monitors the multitude of Mega-City One 
comsats, warsats and spysats that litter the atmosphere. 
Mega-City One maintains trade links with all of the in-system 
colonies, Mars, Hestia and Luna-City on the moon. Mars is 
comprised of ﬁ ve, domed cities inhabited by 8 million citizens. 
Hestia, the tenth plant in Earth’s solar system discovered in 
2009 and colonised in 2051, is a hostile environment that 
grudgingly houses a tiny colony located near to the ruins of 
the original Hestian natives, now all but extinct. Mega-City 
One still has a partial controlling share of Luna-City, though 
these days its interests are leaning towards developing 
more orbital colonies than bidding for further Luna territory. 
Titan, Jupiter’s largest moon, is home to a penal colony for 
renegade Mega-City Judges. Several independent mining 
and prospecting craft operate in the asteroid belt between 
Mars and Saturn. Beyond the solar system, Mega-City One 
enjoys trade with alien races like the birdlike Uqqan and 
maintains close contact with the many out-system colonies, 
providing support to the colonial Judges and Space Corps 
who maintain law and order among the colonies and ﬁ ght 
off incursions from rival Earth powers, including the Sino-
City space programme and alien hostiles such as the Klegg 
Empire. 


===PAGE 182===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 183===
 Thought Crimes
182
The Traveller Core Rulebook, beginning on page 153, 
details the Basic Talents; this chapter details the Advanced 
Talents that can be gained during the Academy of Law 
training for Psi Judges.
Throughout this chapter, the term psion is used. For the 
most part it refers to Psi Judges but in reality it applies to 
all characters – Player and Referee controlled – that use 
psionic powers.
 Psi Division: 
Coping With 
It All
As soon as a cadet is proven to have psionic potential, he or 
she is watched closely by the Academy of Justice’s psionic 
mentors to gauge their suitability for Psi Division. The 
mentors are watching to see how a cadet handles stress, 
particularly mental pressure, because work in Psi Division 
regularly exposes Psi Judges to minds that are disturbed, 
distorted and psychotic, psychopathic or sociopathic. If 
a psion cadet cannot handle such pressures, he is better 
remaining as a Street Judge and not having his psionic 
potential developed.
Those cadets who are selected for, and move into, Psi 
Division, ﬁ nd a world of weirdness awaits them. Street 
Judges deal with what they can see and deduce: Psi Judges 
deal with what perps think, feel, obsess about, ﬁ xate upon, 
dream and mentally distort to ﬁ t whatever picture their 
mind’s eye wants to perceive. Psi training prepares the Psi 
Judge with how to deal with these scenarios and it is difﬁ cult 
to shock a Psi Judge because they have, literally, seen 
and experienced it all: from the purest and most innocent 
thoughts through to the most sick and depraved fantasies.
Although Psi Judges are trained to deal with the worst aspects 
of citizen and perp depravity, they are by no means immune 
to the effects such thoughts have on even the strongest 
mind. Psi Judges undergo a regular three monthly psych-
evaluation with a Med Division psychoanalyst to ensure that 
they are ﬁ t for duty and, most crucially, not adopting the traits 
they have been exposed to.
As an optional  rule for Psi Judges, abstract the three-
monthly psych-evaluation with a 2d6 roll. The Psi Judge 
is looking to roll 8+, with DMs for Psionic Strength and 
Intelligence. If the roll is successful, all is well. If the roll 
is failed, then the Med Division psychoanalyst has found 
something of concern. Note the Effect of the failed roll: this 
is the number of weeks that the Psi Judge must undergo 
mandatory psychotherapy to return to full ﬁ tness. The Judge 
maintains active duties during this time but must report, once 
a week, for psychotherapy. During this time, the Psi Judge 
may learn something about himself that has a game effect: 
roll 2d6 and consult the following table:
2d6 Effect
2 The Judge has learned or uncovered something disturbing or troubling about his own personality. He incurs a 
level of Psionic Trauma (see page 196) as a result.
3-4 The Judge develops a coping mechanism for dealing with those things that have been unearthed during 
psychotherapy. Roll 1d6:
1: A morbid sense of humour.
2: A ﬂ ippant attitude that borders on insolence.
3: A need to bury himself in a peculiar hobby or pastime outside normal duties.
4: A periodic return to Street Judge duties – once every few months.
5: Periodic visits to the Justice Department’s Aggrodome, to work out pent-up aggression.
6: A coping mechanism of the Player’s own devising, reﬂ ecting the Judge’s personality.
6-8 No Effects.
9-11 The Judge taps into inner mental or emotional resources that assist his work as a Psi Judge. Roll 1d6 to 
determine what:
1: +1 to any mental skill (a Science, for example).
2: +1 to any physical skill (Athletics or Melee for instance).
3: +1 to any one Psionic Power (not a Talent).
4: +1 to either Str, Dex or End.
5: +1 to either Int or Inf.
6: The Player’s choice from the above.
12 The Judge emerges with considerable mental stability. All future psych-evaluations are at a +1 DM.

===PAGE 184===
 Thought Crimes
183
 Psykers
Psykers use their psionic powers for criminal ends and the 
term psyker refers most commonly to a psion employed by 
one of the many criminal gangs to further their interests: 
generally extortion, blackmail, intimidation and so forth.
All psions in Mega-City One need to register their Talents 
and, generally, this happens at the point where psionic 
powers demonstrate themselves or if psionic capabilities 
are noticed at school or during routine medical check-ups. 
Psionic potential results in a battery of tests to discover the 
range and extent of powers; these form part of a civilian 
psion’s personal ID records and are available to Justice 
Department and Psi Division in particular. It is thus relatively 
easy for Justice Department to discover the registered range 
of a psyker’s capabilities once he has been identi ﬁ ed as an 
active perp.
Psykers cannot obtain training to develop Advanced Talents 
– those dealt with in this chapter – although legitimate 
training in Basic Talents (those found in the Traveller 
Core Rulebook ) are available through licensed psionic 
development clinics (or Psyk-Skools). Therefore, it is rare to 
ﬁ nd Mega-City One psykers who have a reasonable degree 
of competence in the Advanced Talents in Judge Dredd; 
therefore it is very rare to ﬁ nd a psyker with anything higher 
than, say, Level 1 in a Talent such as Psionic Combat.
That said, there are illegal Psyk-Skools that specialise in 
training psykers in these areas, usually Mob bank-rolled, and 
so psykers specialising in the Advanced Talents available 
in Judge Dredd will be found – although the degree of 
training will vary widely. How a psyker employs his Talents 
to criminal ends depends on the nature and range of his 
Talents and the focus of his employers. The Mob knows 
that psykers who have too much power pose a risk of using 
their Talents against them and so either employ psykers 
who have only Basic Talents or ensure that they have a high 
level of insurance against an advanced psyker potentially 
abusing his position. Such insurance usually involves threats 
of violence against family members or anything else that 
guarantees the psyker tows the Mob line. Those psykers 
who do abuse their position and believe they can get away 
with it, rarely do so for long. 
Psykers and Psi Division
Psi Division does not have the resources to continually 
monitor psykers under psychic surveillance; instead, the 
most active psykers are monitored when there is evidence of 
a crime or as part of a wider surveillance operation directed 
by Street Judges. Psi Division does know who the key 
psykers are and the ofﬁ cial registers mean that Psi Division 
is aware of the Talents they possess. Over and above that, 
engagement between Psi Judges and psykers is limited to 
as-and-when – in other words, when a psyker can be tied to 
a particular crime.
Where the use of psionics is suspected in a crime, Psi 
Division is usually called in. Most Sector Houses have at 
least one duty Psi Judge, and if not central Psi Division, at 
the Hall of Justice, will assign one. This is usually the case 
where specialised psionic powers are required. Psi Judges 
assigned to a case or incident tend to use only those Talents 

===PAGE 185===
 Thought Crimes
184
Advanced Psionic Talents
Talent Learning DM
Aura Perception +1
Dimensional Manipulation –3
Energy Kinesis +1
Personal Enhancement 0
Projection –2
Psionic Attack –2
Psionic Defence –2
Tapping –4
Temporal Manipulation –4
Per previous Talent acquisition check –1
and Powers most relevant to the investigation. As said 
before, they are not heavy guns wheeled-in to mentally zap 
a mundane perp. Psi Division always needs a good reason to 
get involved and it can legitimately refuse a support request 
if there is no clear or good reason why they should be called 
in. This has tended to give Psi Division the reputation for 
being aloof and highly strung (a fact that is more accurate 
than Psi Division likes to admit) but the plain truth is that the 
use of psionics is taxing and if every Psi Judge answered 
every support call or used their powers in every routine case 
where psionics could be an advantage, most Psi Judges 
would never be out of compulsory psychotherapy.
 Advanced 
Talents
Advanced Talents go beyond the Powers available under 
the Basic Talents found in the Traveller Core Rulebook. 
Although some are very powerful, Advanced Talents and 
Powers work in exactly the same way as Basic Talents.
Dimensional and Temporal 
Talents
The world of Judge Dredd is a far stranger one that the early 
20
th Century. The existence of other worlds – both planets 
and parallel planes of existence – have been proven and 
both time and dimensional travel is being actively explored. 
Psi Division is at the forefront of these endeavours, hence the 
development of the Dimensional and Temporal Manipulation 
Talents. Psi Division works in conjunction with Tek Division 
to advance the understanding of dimensional and temporal 
travel, as well as monitoring dimensions such as that once 
inhabited by the Dark Judges.
Any Psi Judge who chooses or gains the Dimensional and/
or Temporal Manipulation Talents forms part of an elite that 
includes the likes of Judge Anderson. They are also sworn 
to absolute secrecy, under the Security of the City Act, not to 
reveal their knowledge, unless permitted to do so or because 

===PAGE 186===
 Thought Crimes
185
the security of the city is under immediate and imminent 
threat. Any Psi Judge who abuses this oath of secrecy faces 
a discharge from the Justice Department, if not a sentence 
to either the Cursed Earth or Titan.
Combat Talents
Psi Judges are not trained to be psionic ﬁ ghters: it is rare for a 
Judge who has developed the Psionic Combat Talent to be 
wheeled-out as a heavy gun against a particularly tough enemy. 
However, there are occasions – such as when the Dark Judges 
or Shujan, Warlord of Ji, assaulted Mega-City One – where 
combative and defensive psionic powers are absolutely essential. 
Thus, Psi Judges are trained not to resort to use of psionics in 
an offensive capacity unless absolutely necessary; but when the 
situation demands it an offensive Power can be used as long as its 
use remains within the law. Any Psi Judge abusing their offensive 
Powers is subject to a discharge from the Justice Department, if 
not a sentence to either the Cursed Earth or Titan.
 Aura Perception
All living organic creatures create an aura; a personal 
signature that is as unique as DNA and which can be 
perceived and read by aura-sensitive psions. To a trained 
psion, an aura indicates the following:
• State of physical health.
• State of mental health.
• Degree of Psionic Power.
Using the Powers within this Talent, the psion can read, 
interpret and, to a certain extent, manipulate the aura of 
creatures and himself. Every aura-perceptive psion can see 
the aura surrounding an organism as a glowing ﬁ eld of psychic 
energy; detailed understanding of what the aura reveals about 
its owner is then dependent on the Read Aura Power.
Read Aura
The psion can drill-deep into the scintillating energy of the 
aura to identify speci ﬁ cs about its owner. On a successful 
Aura Perception roll he can determine if the organism 
is injured, either physically and/or mentally, and to what 
degree, even if physical symptoms are not present. He 
can also determine if the organism is psionically trained, 
although it is not possible to determine the speci ﬁ c Talents 
available to the organism. The psion can, however, gauge 
the organism’s Psionic Strength relative to his own (much 
stronger, much weaker, equal and so forth).
Aura Perception, Psionic Strength, 10-60 
seconds, Easy (+4).
Costs 1.
Mask Aura
The psion can successfully mask his aura from other aura-
perceptive psions. When masked, the psion produces no 
perceptible aura, effectively becoming psychically invisible. 
Masking lasts for 1d6 minutes + the psion’s Psi DM before it 
needs to be re-masked.
Aura Perception, Psionic Strength, 1d6+Psi DM 
minutes, Average (+0).
Costs 2.
Manipulate Aura
With this Power the psion can manipulate his aura’s 
appearance. On a successful Aura Perception roll he can 
convey perfect health, appear to be more powerful than 
he is actually is or manipulate any other condition his aura 
signiﬁ es. A psion reading his aura will only be aware that 
Manipulate Aura is being used if his attempt to Read Aura 
has a higher Effect than the manipulating psion’s own Aura 
Perception roll.
Aura Perception, Psionic Strength, 1d6+Psi DM 
minutes, Difﬁ cult (–2).
Costs 3.
Project Aura
Through this Power the psion can project his aura to a 
distance and even overlay his aura onto another organism. 
The distance of the projection is a base of 10 metres + the 
psion’s Psi DM; however, for a further investment of Psi 
Points, this range can be extended. The psion can project 
his aura a further 10 + Psi DM metres for every additional 
Psi Point above the base cost. The projected aura moves 
as the psion moves, whilst the projection is maintained. The 
psion’s personal aura still surrounds his physical person and 
is visible to other psions if read directly.
Aura Perception, Psionic Strength, 1d6+Psi DM 
minutes, Difﬁ cult (–2).
Costs 4 + 1 additional point per 10+Psi DM 
metres.
 Dimensional Manipulation
This Talent governs the perception and manipulation of 
parallel dimensions (if they exist and are supported in a 
campaign). It is a dif ﬁ cult Talent to develop, as the psion 
has to be able to understand and manipulate the barriers 
separating planes of existence – barriers that exist at a 
quantum level.

===PAGE 187===
 Thought Crimes
186
As a general rule, a dimensionally aware psion can perceive 
a number of alternate realities equal to his Psi DM +1 (if 
those dimensions exist). Referees may increase this number 
if the barriers between dimensions are particularly weak or 
reduce it if they are especially strong.
Dimensional Portals
Travel between dimensions is possible only if a Dimensional 
Portal is available. This may be a rift in time/space or an 
artiﬁ cially generated break in the dimensional barriers. Every 
portal is assigned a Barrier Strength of between 0 and 6, with 
0 being a very weak barrier and 6 a very strong one. The 
Barrier Strength is applied as a negative DM to the psion’s 
Dimensional Manipulation Powers, as noted below.
Locate Portal
The psion can scan his local area (a radius of 10xPsi DM in 
metres) to see if a portal exists. If successful, the psion can 
gain an idea of the portal’s Barrier Strength depending on 
the Effect of his roll:
Effect Result
0 Is aware of the existence of a portal but 
cannot gauge Barrier Strength.
1-2 Can gauge Barrier Strength in general terms 
(very strong, very weak).
3-4+ Can gauge speci ﬁ c Barrier Strength.
Dimensional Manipulation, Psionic Strength, 10-
60 Seconds, Average (+0).
Costs 1.
Dimensional Communication
The psion can communicate with others using a located 
portal without having to move into the dimension itself. The 
Barrier Strength of the portal is applied as a negative DM to 
the skill roll.
Communication across the dimensions is dependent on other 
psionic abilities, such as Telepathy and Clairvoyance; thus 
the psion must have a trained communicative ability and must 
invest Psi Points in a particular Power to make communication. 
Additionally, the number of Psi Points that must be invested in 
the Dimensional Communication Power is dependent on who 
and how the psion wishes to establish communication.
The base Psi cost establishes communication within any 
receptive person on the other side of the barrier.
Base Psi cost x2 establishes communication with a speci ﬁ c 
individual.
Dimensional Manipulation, Psionic Strength, 10-
60 Seconds, Dif ﬁ culty depends on Portal Barrier 
Strength.
Costs 3.
Create Portal
Through this Power the psion creates a portal between his 
own and another dimension. This is always a Very Dif ﬁ cult 
task (–4) and the created portal has a Barrier Strength equal 
to the number of additional Psi Points the psion invests in 
its creation, with the base Psi cost establishing a Barrier 
Strength 0 portal. A created portal lasts for a number of 
hours equal to the psion’s Psi DM x 1d6 – after which the 
portal must be re-established. The psion who created the 
portal always treats it as Barrier Strength 0.
Dimensional Manipulation, Psionic Strength, 1-6 
Minutes, Very Difﬁ cult (–4).
Costs 4+Additional points for Barrier Strength.
Manipulate Portal
The psion can manipulate a dimensional portal; either 
reducing its Barrier Strength, extending its existence or 
closing it altogether. The Barrier Strength is applied as a 
negative DM to the skill roll and the Psi Points cost depends 
on the degree of manipulation:
• Reduce Barrier Strength: 2 points per point of Barrier 
Strength manipulated (making the barrier either stronger 
or weaker).
• Inﬂ uence Portal Existence: 1 point per hour of existence 
manipulated – either extended or decreased.
• Immediate Portal Close: Barrier Strength x2.
Portals and Non-
Psions
Any portal between dimensions with a Barrier 
Strength of 0 can be passed through freely by both 
psions and non-psions. If a psion can overcome 
a portal’s Barrier Strength he can take through a 
number of individuals equal to his Psi DM, increasing 
this by an additional person for every Psi Point he 
expended per trip.
Referees can, of course, relax this rule if inter-
dimensional travel is integral to the campaign.

===PAGE 188===
 Thought Crimes
187
Dimensional Manipulation, Psionic Strength, 1-
6 Minutes, Difﬁ  culty depends on Portal Barrier 
Strength.
Costs Variable.
 Energy Kinesis
Energy Kinesis is the Talent governing the manipulation 
of energy – principally electricity but also temperature 
and light. The psion’s Powers manipulate energy streams 
on a particular spectrum and wavelength to achieve a 
particular effect.
Pyrokinesis is a part of this Talent, just as it forms a part of the 
Telekinesis Talent; however the version presented as part of 
this Talent is of a more advanced nature and is renamed 
Thermokinesis, reﬂ ecting its extended capabilities.
Electrokinesis
Electrokinesis is the manipulation of electrical energy and 
currents. Using it, psions can divert power from one source 
to another (a battery for instance or another set of circuits), 
create short-circuits or spikes and even draw upon their own 
electrical energy to provide temporary power.
The psion needs to be in physical contact with whatever he 
is trying to in ﬂ uence, electrically. For the basic Psi cost the 
psion can:
• Start an electrically Powered device.
• Cause a device to stop.
• Overload the device with energy, causing it to fuse or 
short-circuit.
By introducing more Psi Points, the psion converts his brain-
generated electrical energy into a usable energy source 
for the device. In this way, a device that is lacking a Power 
source can be activated, with the amount of Psi Points being 
commensurate with the size of the device to be activated:
Device Type Additional Psi Points required
Inefﬁ cient, Power-hungry, small device (say TL <6) 2
Inefﬁ cient, Power-hungry, large device (say TL <6) 4
Efﬁ cient, Power-hungry, small device (say TL <6) 1
Efﬁ cient, Power-hungry, large device (say TL <6) 2
Efﬁ cient, Power-moderate small device (TL >6) 0
Efﬁ cient, Power-moderate large device (TL >6) 1
The Effect of the roll determines the duration, in hours, that 
the psion can power the device as long as physical contact 
can be maintained.
Note that very large devices, such as large vehicles and 
starships, cannot be in ﬂ uenced by Electrokinesis as their 
energy requirements are so great that a psion would run the 
risk of fatally de-electrifying himself.
Energy Kinesis, Psionic Strength, 10-60 seconds, 
Average (+0).
Costs 2.
Luminokinesis
Luminokinesis is the mental manipulation of light waves 
– both visible and invisible. With a successful use of the 
Power, the psion can:
• Bend or refract light to create an illusion or distraction.
• Disrupt or interfere with visible light, such as a laser, 
reducing its damage.
• Create pockets of shadow or illumination.
Bend/Refract Light: This use of the Power creates a 
distracting optical illusion that imposes a negative DM equal 
to the Effect of the roll on skills relying on sight used by 
outside observers.
Disrupt Light: This use of the Power reduces the damage 
inﬂ icted by a visible light beam or bolt by the number of Psi 
Points invested in the Power. The amount of Psi Points being 
invested in the Power must be declared before any weapon 
damage is rolled.
Pockets of Shadow or Illumination : This Power 
can be used at range, diverting light to or from the target 
area. The amount of Psi Points invested creates either 
a positive or negative DM to skill use, depending on the 
circumstances, to all within the radius of the affected area. 
The Psi Point investment has the following effects:

===PAGE 189===
 Thought Crimes
188
Psi Points Shadow or Illumination Effect
1 Dimming or slight increase in available 
light.
2 Equivalent of twilight or a bright dawn.
3 Equivalent to nighttime or a bright, sunny 
day.
4 Absolute darkness or blinding brilliance.
Energy Kinesis, Psionic Strength, 10-60 seconds, 
Difﬁ cult (–2).
Costs 2+Variable, depending on effect.
Thermokinesis
By inﬂ uencing the substance of an object the character 
can raise or lower its temperature, which may cause it to 
burst into ﬂ ames or even freeze. Roll 1d6 and add the Effect 
of the check.
Thermokinesis Effect Target:
0-4  Becomes warmer or cooler but is undamaged.
5-8  Is burned or severely frosted, suffering 1d6   
 damage.
9+  Suffers 2d6 damage and may burst into ﬂ ame if   
 ﬂ ammable or freeze if a freezable substance.
Where temperature in an organic creature is reduced and 
the Effect is 5+, the Referee may rule that hypothermia 
results. Hypothermia is the reduction of the body’s operating 
temperature and it does not require a large drop in 
temperature for hypothermia to have a profound effect.
Once hypothermia takes hold, the only cure is to gradually 
warm the body again, through a steady and gentle 
application of heat through blankets, warm drinks and 
shelter. Hypothermia occurs in stages:
Stage 1
Body temperature drops by 1-2°C below normal temperature 
(35-36°C). Mild to strong shivering occurs. The victim is 
unable to perform complex tasks with the hands as they 
become numb. Breathing becomes quick and shallow. 
Goose bumps form, raising body hair on end in an attempt 
to create an insulating layer of air around the body (which 
is of limited use in humans due to lack of suf ﬁ cient hair but 
useful in other species). Often, a person will experience a 
warm sensation, as if they have recovered but they are in 
fact heading into Stage 2.
Stage 2
Body temperature drops by 2-4°C. Shivering becomes more 
violent. Lack of co-ordination in muscles becomes apparent. 
Movements are slow and laboured, accompanied by a 

===PAGE 190===
 Thought Crimes
189
As the Art skill is divided into specialisations (see Traveller 
Core Rulebook, page 52), the psion must declare which 
specialisation he is intending to achieve through his skill 
augmentation.
Personal Enhancement, Psionic Strength, 
Variable depending on activity, Average (+0).
Costs 2 points per 1 level of Art skill.
Enhanced Athletics
For every 2 Psi Points invested, the character’s Athletics 
skill is temporarily increased by 1 level, with the duration of 
the Power lasting for the physical activity being undertaken. 
If Athletics is not possessed as a skill, then the ﬁ rst 2 Psi 
Points provides the psion with a skill level of 0.
As the Athletics skill is divided into specialisations (see 
Traveller Core Rulebook , page 52), the psion must 
declare which specialisation he is intending to achieve 
through his skill augmentation.
Personal Enhancement, Psionic Strength, 1-6 
seconds, Average (+0).
Costs 2 points per 1 level of Athletics skill.
Enhanced Charisma
The psion uses his psychic powers to enhance his personal 
charisma when dealing with others, no matter what the 
circumstances. For every 2 Psi Points invested, the 
character temporarily increases Broker, Deception, Diplomat 
or Persuade by 1 level with the duration of the Power lasting 
for the activity being undertaken. If the skill in question is not 
possessed as a skill, then the ﬁ rst 2 Psi Points provides the 
psion with a skill level of 0.
Personal Enhancement, Psionic Strength, 
Variable depending on activity, Average (+0).
Costs 2 points per 1 level of skill.
 Projection
Through this Talent the psion projects various parts of his 
psyche outside the conﬁ nes of his body. The most common 
manifestation of the Talent is Out of Body Experience, which 
may also be known as astral projection or astral travelling, 
but the Talent also governs the powers of projecting emotions 
and the entire personality.
Out of Body Experience
The psion’s psyche leaves the body and is able to travel for 
a distance determined by the Psionic Range table, using the 
Telepathy column (see Traveller Core Rulebook, page 
stumbling pace and mild confusion, although the victim may 
appear alert. The victim becomes pale. Lips, ears, ﬁ ngers 
and toes may become blue.
Stage 3
Body temperature drops below approximately 32ºC. Shivering 
usually stops. The character has difﬁ culty speaking, sluggish 
thinking and amnesia start to appear; inability to use hands 
and stumbling is also present. Below 30ºC the exposed skin 
becomes blue and puffy, muscle co-ordination becomes very 
poor, walking becomes almost impossible and the victim 
exhibits incoherent/irrational behaviour. Major organs fail 
and clinical death occurs – although, because of decreased 
cellular activity, the body will actually take longer to undergo 
brain death.
The Referee needs to determine the movement through 
each stage, depending on the local conditions. However, 
without warmth or shelter, the degeneration can be rapid 
with no more than a few hours between each stage.
Characters suffering from Stage 1 hypothermia halve their 
physical attributes. All physical skills suffer a –1 DM in 
addition to any negative DMs from the reduction of physical 
characteristics. If warmth is not applied within 1+1d3 hours, 
Stage 2 results.
Characters suffering from Stage 2 hypothermia reduce all 
physical characteristics to 1. If warmth and shelter cannot be 
found within 1d3 hours, then Stage 3 results.
In Stage 3, the character is unable to move and death will 
result within 1d3 hours unless both medical treatment and 
warmth/shelter can be found.
Energy Kinesis, Psionic Strength, 10-60 seconds, 
Difﬁ cult (–2).
Costs 3+Range.
 Personal Enhancement
Through this Talent the psion uses his psychic energy to 
enhance certain physical capabilities, in much the same way 
that Psionic Strength points are used to augment Strength 
and Dexterity.
Enhanced Art
Through entering a trance-like state, for every 2 Psi Points 
invested, the character’s Art skill is temporarily increased by 
1 level, with the duration of the Power lasting for the physical 
activity being undertaken. If Art is not possessed as a skill, then 
the ﬁ rst 2 Psi Points provides the psion with a skill level of 0.

===PAGE 191===
 Thought Crimes
190
153). The speed of travel is as fast or as slow as the psion 
wishes it be and can be instantaneous, as long as the time 
limit for the experience is not exceeded. Using this Power 
the psyche can thus travel great (but not interplanetary) 
distances. Whilst in the OBE state the psion cannot physically 
interact with his surroundings and is invisible to mundane 
sight – although his aura travels with him and may thus be 
seen by aura-aware psions.
The psion can remain in an OBE state for up to 30 minutes, 
plus a further 15 minutes equal to every point of his Psionic 
Strength DM. If the psion does not return to his body within 
this period, he is forced to snap back to consciousness 
and must throw Psi+End 9+ to avoid incurring one level of 
Psionic Trauma.
Projection, Psionic Strength, 30 minutes+15 
minutes per point of Psi DM, Average (+0).
Costs 2 points plus range.
Project Personality
The psion creates a psychic representation of his personality 
and appearance that visibly appears before others. The 
Power is ranged, so the psion can project his personality over 
great but not interplanetary, distances. If the psion spends an 
additional Psi Point when projecting his personality, audible 
communication projection can also be attained, although the 
psion will not be able to hear any offered response; neither 
can the psion see the area that his personality is projected to.
Project Personality works best when the psion has visited or 
can visualise, the place he is projecting to. If he cannot, he 
suffers a –2 DM to the skill roll.
Projection, Psionic Strength, 10-60 seconds, 
Difﬁ cult (–2).
Costs 4 plus range (+1 point for added verbal 
projection).
Project Emotion
The psion is able to project his emotions into the psyche of 
another. The target experiences the same emotional state as 
that being experienced by the psion and, unless the target is 
a willing recipient of the projection, he resists the projection 
attempt with his Int DM (if positive). The Effect of the psion’s 
Project Emotion determines the intensity of the emotional 
experience felt by the target; an Effect of 0 or 1 indicates that 
that the target feels the emotions at the same intensity as 
the psion; a higher Effect indicates a more intense emotional 
experience for the target.
The target must be in line of sight for the projection to 
be effective.
The emotional state lasts for between 10 and 60 minutes and 
in this period the target will act according to the emotions 
being experienced.
Projection, Psionic Strength, 10-60 minutes, 
Difﬁ cult (–2).
Costs 3 plus range.
Glamour
This Power allows the psion to project a subtle distraction 
within a radius in metres equal to the number of Psi Points 
invested in the Power. Those within the radius cease to pay 
the psion any attention, completely forgetting his presence, 
becoming temporarily distracted by something else: for the 
brief duration of the Glamour, the psion becomes effectively 
invisible, edited-out of the short-term memory of those 
affected.
Projection, Psionic Strength, 1-6 rounds, Dif ﬁ cult 
(–2).
Costs 1 per metre of radius.
 Psionic Attack
The ability to use the mind as a weapon has long interested 
those researchers who want to see how far the mind 
can be pushed. Although some psionic attacks (and, 
correspondingly, defences) form part of the Telepathy Talent, 
dedicated training in psionic attacks form their own Talent, 
with the psion being trained in using his mental capabilities 
for violent purposes.
Most psionic attacks are based on meting-out either physical 
or mental trauma and involve a variable Psi expenditure. A 
powerful psion can in ﬂ ict large amounts of damage without 
even having to touch his intending victim.
Pain
The psion overloads the pain receptors of his intended victim 
with psychic energy, causing either great or subtle pain to 
ﬂ ood the target’s body. The pain attack causes no lasting 
physical damage but whilst it is being experienced the victim 
may believe that his entire body is being mentally shredded, 
such is the intense agony.
The psion decides how many Psi Points he wishes to invest 
in the attack. This number acts as a negative DM to all skills 
the target tries to use, including characteristic DMs, for the 

===PAGE 192===
 Thought Crimes
191
duration of the attack. The Effect of the skill roll determines 
the duration of the pain felt by the target:
0 1-6 seconds
1 1-6 rounds
2 1-6 minutes
3 10-60 minutes
4 1-6 hours
Psionic Attack, Psionic Strength, Variable, Difﬁ cult 
(–2).
Costs Variable, plus range.
Paralysis
Paralysis inﬂ icts no pain but it renders the target immobile for 
a period dependent on the Effect of the attack. The Psi cost 
is variable, with speci ﬁ c parts of the body costing differing 
amounts:
Hand/Foot  1 point
Arm/Leg  2 points 
Neck   2 points
Chest/Shoulders  3 points
Torso   3 points
Head   3 points
Thus, to completely paralyse a person, ensuring no mobility 
of any kind, it would require 15 Psi Points. A paralysed 
location is unable to move and remains locked in position 
for the duration of the paralysis. This may result in the target 
falling prone, toppling over and so forth, depending on local 
conditions. The paralysis does not prevent breathing or 
blood ﬂ ow but if the head or neck are targeted, vocal chords, 
jaws, lips and mouth will be paralysed, vastly restricting 
communication.
The Effect of the skill roll determines the duration of the 
paralysis:
0 1-6 seconds
1 1-6 rounds
2 1-6 minutes
3 10-60 minutes
4 1-6 hours
Psionic Attack, Psionic Strength, Variable, Difﬁ cult 
(–2).
Costs Variable, plus range.
Mind Blast
A more powerful version of the Telekinetic Punch Power, 
Mind Blast delivers an extremely powerful shockwave of 
psionic energy either at a speci ﬁ c target or to a number of 
targets within a speciﬁ c radius. The psion must specify which 
way he is directing the Power.
If directed at a speci ﬁ c target, the Mind Blast delivers 
3d6+Effect damage for every 2 Psi invested in the Power.
If used to effect an area, 2d6+Effect damage is delivered 
to every living thing in a radius of 1 metre for every 1 Psi 
invested in the Power.
Damage is directed as physical damage, being applied to 
Str, Dex and End.
Psionic Attack, Psionic Strength, Variable, Difﬁ cult 
(–2).
Costs Variable, plus range.
Mind Shock
Mind Shock is used against other psions and is designed 
to deliver Psionic Trauma rather than immediate damage. If 
the attack is successful, the target psion sustains 1 level of 
Psionic Trauma, plus an additional level equal to the Effect 
of the attack. The defending psion may use his own Psionic 
Strength DM as a negative DM against the attacker’s roll.
Psionic Attack, Psionic Strength, Variable, 
Average (+0).
Costs 3 plus range.
Unlock
The Unlock Power uses the subconscious of the target as 
the weapon. The psion unlocks those parts of the brain 
where nightmares, fears and dark secrets are stored, ﬁ lling 
the target’s psyche with nightmarish visions, uncontrollable 
terror, paralysing panic attacks or deep-seated guilt. The 
target’s Int+Psi DMs act against the psion as a negative DM 
but if the attack is successful, the target suffers a negative 
DM to all skills equal to the Psi Points invested in the attack, 
for a period determined by the Effect of the attack:
0 1-6 seconds
1 1-6 rounds
2 1-6 minutes
3 10-60 minutes
4 1-6 hours
In this time the target is clearly disturbed, agitated, unable 
to concentrate, hyperventilates and suffers hallucinations as 
his own mind battles against him.
Psionic Attack, Psionic Strength, Variable, 
Average (+0).
Costs Variable, plus range.

===PAGE 193===
 Thought Crimes
192
 Psionic Defence
Defensive psionics are trained in mitigating offensive psionics 
using a variety of active and passive techniques as described 
in the Powers associated with this Talent. Although Psionic 
Defence is the natural counterpart to Psionic Attack, it does 
not necessarily follow that all combat psions study defence 
– or that all defensive psionics are necessarily peaceful.
Mind Blank
The psion turns his mind into a blank void that cannot be 
detected by other psions, even those who are aura-aware. 
The Power renders the psion immune to any psionic attacks 
for the duration of the Mind Blank but neither can he exercise 
his own psionic Powers. Every Psi Point invested in the 
Power increases the duration of the Mind Blank by a number 
of minutes equal to his Int characteristic.
Psionic Defence, Psionic Strength, Int in minutes, 
Average (+0).
Costs 1.
Mind Mirror
This powerful ability turns the psion’s mind into a mirror, 
reﬂ ecting any psionic attack back at the attacker. It is, 
however, dangerous as the defending psion does not know 
how many Psi Points will be required to make Mind Mirror 
effective.
The Power works by matching the incoming Psionic Strength 
points invested in the attack and reversing the energy ﬂ ow 
towards the attacker. If the Mind Mirror Power is invoked 
successfully, the attacking psion suffers the effects of the 
attack, as long as the defending psion as able to match the 
Psi Points invested in the attack and exceed them by at 
least 1 point.
If a defending psion uses Mind Mirror against passive psionic 
Powers (those that do not in ﬂ ict damage in some form but 
may be concerned with detection and information retrieval) 
then the attacking psion receives information re ﬂ ecting his 
own, personal state – which may or may not act to confuse 
or confound.
Psionic Defence, Psionic Strength, 1-6 seconds, 
Difﬁ cult (–2)
Costs 1+Psi Points of attacking Power.
Psychic Armour
Psychic Armour places a psionic barrier in front of the psion’s 
mind, absorbing damage from psionic attacks in the same 
way physical armour protects against physical damage. 
The amount of damage reduced is equal to the Psi Points 
invested in the Power.
Psionic Defence, Psionic Strength, 1-6 seconds, 
Average (+0).
Costs 1 per point of damage defended.
Psychic Absorption
This Power works in exactly the same way as Psychic Armour 
but the defending psion absorbs the Psi Points charging the 
attack and places them at his own disposal. Any excess Psi 
Points act as damage as per the nature of the attack.
Psionic Defence, Psionic Strength, 1-6 seconds, 
Difﬁ cult (–2).
Costs 1 per point of damage absorbed.


===PAGE 194===
 Thought Crimes
193
 Tapping
Psions who are trained in tapping use their powers to both 
draw in their own physical characteristics to augment their 
Psionic Strength and, commonly, the characteristics of 
others, functioning almost as psychic vampires. The tapping 
of others can lead to a psion developing large Psi Point 
reserves but such individuals, in addition to the fear that 
surrounds their vampiric tendencies, tend be viewed with 
deep suspicion by other psions who are prepared to rely on 
conventional reserves and regeneration.
Tapping is therefore a powerful and feared Talent, its 
practitioners often pariahs in both the psion and mundane 
communities.
Tap Self
The psion taps one of his characteristics, transforming the 
electrical energy into usable Psi Points. Every characteristic 
point tapped generates 1 Psi Point. All characteristics, with 
the exceptions of Education, Inﬂ uence and Social Standing, 
may be tapped and as a characteristic is weakened, the 
physical capabilities associated with it diminish accordingly. 
Heavily tapping Endurance, for instance, lowers the ability 
to withstand physical trauma and disease; tapping Dexterity 
reduces agility and co-ordination; tapping Intelligence 
reduces the ability to concentrate, reason and act rationally.
To tap a characteristic the psion simply needs to succeed in 
a Tapping roll, gaining the additional Psi Points immediately: 
there is no limit on the number of characteristic points that 
can be tapped. However the physical effects of tapping take 
an immediate toll and, if a characteristic reaches zero, the 
psion is rendered incapacitated as per the damage rules 
found in the Traveller Core Rulebook.
Tapping, Psionic Strength, 1-6 seconds, Average 
(+0).
Costs 1 Characteristic point.
Tap Other
This Power works in exactly the same way as Tap Self. 
However, the tapping psion suffers a DM equal to the 
characteristic DM of the characteristic he is attempting to 
leach. The psion must also be in physical contact with the 
target and cannot tap more than half (round down) of the 
targeted characteristic in a single attempt.
Tapping, Psionic Strength, 1-6 seconds minus 
Target Characteristic DM.
Costs 1 Characteristic point from target.
Tap Emotion
Instead of tapping physical characteristics, the psion 
instead uses emotional energy, transferring it into himself 
and converting it to Psionic Strength. The psion must target 
another individual and cannot tap his own emotions; and he 
must be in physical contact with the target.
The Power only works with powerful, deeply-affecting 
emotions such as love, hate, fear, anger and envy. Someone 
in a ‘normal’ placid state cannot be affected. The Referee 
should assign the emotion with a strength of between 2 and 
12, reﬂ ecting the depth of feeling. All consuming anger, for 
instance, would warrant a strength of 12, whilst mild jealousy 
only 3 or 4. The strength of the emotion is the limit that the 
psion can tap. Tapping emotions has its own dif ﬁ culties, 
so there are no DMs for the emotion’s strength and as the 
emotion is tapped its strength decreases in proportion with 
what the psion leaches. Thus, a psion could use this Power 
to transform an all-consuming rage into mild anger; or sap a 
target of his deep, abiding love.
Tapping, Psionic Strength, 10-60 seconds, 
Difﬁ cult (–2).
Costs 1 Emotional Strength from Target.
Mind Switch
This Power allows the psion to swap minds with another. 
Physical contact must be maintained as the switch occurs.
The target applies his Int DM as a negative DM to the psion’s 
mind switch attempt and the cost in Psi Points is equal to half 
the subject’s Int, rounded up. Once swapped, the psion’s 
mind occupies and controls that of the subject’s body and 
vice versa. The psion has no access to the memories or 
experiences of the subject but does take on the physical 
characteristics. Therefore, the psion and subject swap Int 
and Edu characteristics but retain Str, Dex and End.
The mind switch has a safe limit of a number of hours equal 
to the Effect of the roll, multiplied by the result of a 2d6 throw. 
If the psion does not swap minds back at the end of this time, 
both he and the subject begin to accrue 1 level of Psionic 
Trauma for each 6 hour period thereafter.
Tapping, Psionic Strength, 10-60 Seconds, 
Difﬁ cult (–2).
Costs Int of subject, divided by 2.
 Temporal Manipulation
The Temporal Manipulation Talent primarily concerns 
travelling in time, forwards or backwards, or manipulating 

===PAGE 195===
 Thought Crimes
194
the ﬂ ow of the timestream. Temporal Manipulation is 
therefore a very powerful Talent: the ability to in ﬂ uence 
time – stopping it, speeding it up, changing the past to 
inﬂ uence the future – can have profound implications for 
the characters and the campaign. The detailed implications 
are beyond the scope of this book but are discussed at a 
high level in the descriptions of the individual Powers. A very 
good example of how temporal manipulation is used to effect 
crime is told in the ‘Invisible Man’ story, where a perp uses 
an experimental distortion ﬁ eld to effectively slow-down time 
around him, thereby allowing him to commit crimes almost 
undetected (although the power in question was generated 
by a machine, rather than a psionic Power).
The Temporal Manipulation Talent assumes that time 
can be in ﬂ uenced psionically; that the powers of the mind 
can shape the fabric of time. It presupposes that certain 
individuals are ﬂ uid in time, being able to use their powers 
to move backwards or forwards through the sheer force of 
will rather than having to rely on time machines – although 
temporal science may be signi ﬁ cantly understood to permit 
time machines to exist alongside such psions.
Time Shift
This is the power of time travel – the ability to move forwards 
or backwards through time.
The direction and degree of movement must always be 
speciﬁ ed by the time shifter before the Temporal Manipulation 
roll is made. Every Time Shift is a Very Difﬁ cult (–4) task but 
additional modiﬁ ers are applied, as noted below.
The degree of travel – how far, forwards or backwards – 
depends on the number of Psi Points invested in the shift, as 
described in the table below:
Degree Base Psi Cost
Seconds 1
Rounds 2
Minutes 4
Hours 6
Days 8
Weeks 10
Months 12
Years 14
Decades 16
Centuries 18
Millennia 20
At the Base Psi Cost the psion moves 1d6 units of that 
increment. Moving an additional d6 requires an additional 
Psi Cost equal to half the Base Cost. So, moving 1d6 hours 
forwards or backwards costs 6 Psi; moving 2d6 costs 9 Psi 
and so forth.
If the character wants to travel to a precise point in time, 
then he may attempt to do so but increases the dif ﬁ culty to 
Formidable (–6).
Moving Additional People and 
Cargo
A psion can time shift with no difﬁ culty when wearing clothing 
and carrying personal items that can be easily carried on the 
back, in the hands, in pockets and so forth. Large and bulky 
items increase the Time Shift Psi cost; it costs an additional 
1 Psi Point to transport up to 100kg (2 Psi Points for up to 
200kg and so forth). The psion must have physical contact 
with the object at the moment the Time Shift is executed.
If the psion wishes to take additional people with him, he can 
extend the range of his Time Shift ﬁ eld to encompass a 1 
metre radius for every additional Psi Point invested in the shift. 
However, he suffers a –1 DM to the Temporal Manipulation 
roll for every individual within the area of effect.
Temporal Manipulation, Psionic Strength, Very 
Difﬁ cult (–4).
Costs dependent on degree of time travel.
Time Freeze
Using this Power the psion freezes time but is unfrozen 
himself. Time can only be frozen for short periods; 1d6 
seconds per Psi Point invested in the Power. For each 
additional Psi Point invested the psion can extend the 
unfrozen bubble by a 1 metre radius, with anyone within that 
radius remaining unfrozen.
During the time freeze characters are at liberty to make 
changes to the environment based on common sense 
principles. For instance, moving a tank that is frozen in time 
requires driving it and, as its mechanisms will be frozen 
in time, it cannot be moved unless the psion extends the 
range of the unfrozen bubble to include it (which would also 
unfreeze any occupants). Ultimately the Referee will need to 
arbitrate on what can and cannot be interfered with.
At the end of the freeze period, time immediately resumes 
with any changes taking whatever effect they will have on 
whatever actions were being performed before the freeze.
Temporal Manipulation, Psionic Strength, 
Variable, Very Difﬁ cult (–4).
Costs 1 point per 1d6 seconds of frozen time.

===PAGE 196===
 Thought Crimes
195
Paradox Adjustment
Changing time can result in all manner of paradoxes: 
accidentally killing a wasp in the past my irrevocably alter 
the course of the future, for instance. This Power allows the 
psion to rectify a known paradox my subtly in ﬂ uencing the 
fabric of time so that potentially catastrophic changes are 
mitigated and the future remains, essentially, on its previous 
course.
The Referee should assign any potential paradox a strength 
of between 2 and 12, with 2 being a very minor ‘blip’ and 
12 being a catastrophic change to future events. To correct 
the paradox the psion must spend a number of Psi Points 
equal to the paradox’s strength and make a successful 
Temporal Manipulation roll. If successful, then the paradox 
is either completely mitigated or its strength (and therefore 
consequences) reduced by the amount of Psi Points used.
Temporal Manipulation, Psionic Strength, Very 
Difﬁ cult (–4).
Costs Variable, depending on the strength of the 
paradox.
Handling Temporal Paradox
Any campaign involving time travel must address the nature 
of paradox: the ability to inﬂ uence the past with the possibility 
that the future is changed, leading to anomalies that would 
negate (completely or partially) the actions and existence of 
those who created the change – meaning that the change, in 
the ﬁ rst place, might become impossible.
The Referee needs to decide on the nature of time in order 
to explain, resolve or avoid the question of paradox. This 
book cannot go into detail on the subject but some options 
for consideration are presented here.
Mutable Time
The past can be altered but certain alterations may result 
in the character’s present and future being altered in 
accordance with that change. The change might be so 
profound that the characters cannot return to their present 
because, the present they left, has simply ceased to exist. 
The best illustration of this is the character who travels back 
in time and does something that prevents him from being 
born (killing his great, great grandfather, for example). In 
the present he would no longer exist and so time changes 
to compensate. The character might therefore ﬁ nd himself 
stranded in the past, because he cannot exist in the 
future or he might be erased from time altogether (literally 
disappearing) because he should not exist at all. This is an 
extreme measure and, perhaps, the most realistic (given the 
overall realism of time travel in the ﬁ rst place).
The Bradbury Effect
Here, any change, no matter how tiny, reverberates through 
the timestreams like ripples of water on a still lake. Stepping 
on an insect in the distant past has consequences that 
magnify through the timestreams, profoundly affecting 
the future in some way. The characters still exist but their 
present is very different to the one they left, because the 
change they initiated has been profoundly magni ﬁ ed as 
it has reverberated down through history. This is named 
the Bradbury Effect after Ray Bradbury’s celebrated short 
story ‘A Sound of Thunder’ in which the accidental death 
of a butterﬂ y in earth’s prehistory vastly alters the future; 
the butterﬂ y’s contribution to the ecology in ﬂ uenced whole 
ecosystems and without it, changes knock-on and amplify 
to the point that the character’s future is totally altered when 
they return. If using this as the basis for time travel, then 
the characters will need to ﬁ nd ways of isolating themselves 
from interacting with the past in any way, shape or form, 
because even their mere presence could be damaging.
Time Forgives
The nature of time is one of constant adjustment; changes to 
the past result in time itself compensating for those changes 
to ensure that the future maintains a predetermined course 
– much like a river ﬂ ows around an obstacle, eddies but 
still ends-up at the sea. Any changes the characters make 
have immediate and short-term consequences – and these 
may reverberate to the present – but essentially the present 
remains unaltered. Killing one’s great, great grandfather 
might mean that the character is born, as he is, to someone 
else: time compensates to maintain continuity but with 
obvious consequences for the character’s personal history 
– but not the ﬂ ow of time itself. This may be an unrealistic 
way of portraying the nature of time but makes the handling 
of paradox much easier for the Referee.
Immutable Time
The past simply cannot be altered, no matter how small or 
great the intended change. Events will always intercede that 
prevent the characters from altering the present. Assume 
that a character intends to kill his great, great grandfather; no 
matter what he does, time exerts an inﬂ uence to ensure that 
it cannot happen. The great, great grandfather miraculously 
survives or the character encounters insurmountable 
obstacles to his plans. Time is ﬁ xed at all points and although 
subtle attempts to change it might be exercised, they never 
assume their intended effect.
Divergent Parallel Time
Changes in the past create a rift in the fabric of reality that 
creates a separate, alternate timeline. The characters might 
ﬁ nd their future altered but the alteration is a separate 

===PAGE 197===
 Thought Crimes
196
dimension created as a result of their actions. They can 
therefore either travel to an alternate present but may equally 
have access to the present they left behind by crossing the 
dimensional boundaries to reach the branch of time where 
their interference never took place. This option therefore 
introduces parallel dimensions into the campaign, which 
may or may not ﬁ t with the campaign’s aims.
Intolerant Time
A similar concept to immutable time but any profound 
change that would impact signi ﬁ cantly on the present sees 
the characters automatically and perhaps traumatically, 
returned to their present at the instant the change is affected. 
Like a body rejecting a foreign object, time enforces its 
nature when there is a sense of unequivocal alteration to its 
course. Characters might suddenly ﬁ nd themselves expelled 
from the past, returning to the future and suffering Psionic 
Trauma as a result.
An Alternate Past
This is a variation on the Divergent Parallel Time concept. 
Travelling back in time also means travelling dimensionally: 
the past of the characters is immutable and, instead, they can 
only reach a past that follows a parallel course to their own in 
which their effects can be sustained. When they return to the 
present, they return to their own, unchanged, reality. 
Passive Observers
Any time traveller can only observe events but not interact 
with them. The characters do not physically travel in time 
but do so mentally, able to watch events but do nothing to 
inﬂ uence them. This option ﬁ ts a psionic campaign quite 
neatly and prevents paradox from occurring but limits 
characters’ options to that of merely reporting them.
 Psionic 
Trauma
Psions wield huge power but the ability to access the hidden 
powers of the mind also leaves them vulnerable to the 
stresses that inevitably accompany the use of such power: 
Psionic Trauma, mental instability and a loss of sanity are all 
very real threats to an active psion. The de ﬁ nitions of these 
conditions are as follows:
Psionic Trauma
Unleashing the powers of the subconscious mind risks 
damaging the conscious mind and the personality. Even the 
most seasoned Psi Judge is dealing with forces that can have 
a profound effect on one’s character and mental outlook – no 
matter how rigorous the training at the Academy of Law. At 
its most basic level, Psionic Trauma is a weakening of the 
mind to deal with the powers being consciously channelled; 
as it grows, Psionic Trauma leads to a weakening of the 
mind’s immune system, exposing the psion to risk of mental 
illness and psychosis.
Mental Instability
At low levels, Psionic Trauma creates vulnerability to 
psychosis and mental illness; at higher levels it paves the 
way for them. As Psionic Trauma develops so does the 
chance of mental illness and psychosis taking hold. Mental 
illnesses are conditions where the character experiences 
a variety of mental and personality based disorders but is 
still capable of functioning in society. Psychosis is a severe 
form of mental instability in which all contact with reality is 
lost. Psychotics are very often delusional, deeply paranoid, 
unable or unwilling to engage with others and very often 
shrink within themselves as a way of defending their fragile 
minds from both external and internal pressures.
Insanity
The most extreme form of psychosis is insanity – a permanent 
state of psychosis manifesting itself in any number of states 
but which makes them, characteristically, a danger to 
themselves and others. Insanity is not irreversible but it is a 
hardened psychotic state that may go unnoticed for years by 
others but continually wounds the sufferer.
The 
Conditions in 
Game Terms
Judge Dredd psions – both Psi Judges and others – may 
go through the process of mental collapse in the following 
order:
• Low Level Psionic Trauma
• Medium Level Psionic Trauma
• High Level Psionic Trauma
• Mental Instability
• Insanity
Psions suffering from Psionic Trauma experience restrictions 
to their Talents and Powers in the form of negative DMs and 
increased Psi Strength costs. As levels of trauma build, 
mental instability is risked; once a psion becomes mentally 

===PAGE 198===
 Thought Crimes
197
unstable, it can then be a rapid descent into insanity, if the 
condition is left untreated.
Mental Instability and Insanity are dif ﬁ cult to quantify in 
game terms, although attempts are made to do so. More 
importantly, both conditions should be treated as behaviours 
to be expressed through roleplaying rather than dice and 
statistics-based mechanics. Extreme changes in personality 
cannot be satisfactorily dealt with as DMs; instead, they 
should be treated seriously by Players and Referees as a 
way of running the character – if indeed the character should 
be run at all. A deeply disturbed or insane character might 
be better handled as a Non-Player Character or retired from 
a campaign altogether.
 Psionic Trauma
As already outlined, Psionic Trauma is effectively mental 
damage which leaves a character exposed to a deteriorating 
mental state. Psionic Trauma is not, in itself, an insanity; it is 
a weakening of the mental immune system which can lead 
to infections building, creating illness.
There are a maximum of six levels of Psionic Trauma before 
Mental Instability takes hold. Psionic Trauma is accrued, 
level by level, when:
• The Int characteristic is reduced to half its current level 
through psionic damage.
• Powers are used in rapid succession.
• Psionic Strength points are exceeded.
• The character undergoes a traumatic mental or 
emotional experience, such as being possessed or 
experiencing the death of a loved one.
• Sudden or prolonged exposure to a stressful 
environment.
Losing Int
If Int is reduced to half its current level as a result of damage 
inﬂ icted by a psionic attack or through other means, one 
level of Psionic Trauma is accrued. Psionic Trauma is not 
removed when Int regains its former level; it can only be 
treated through medical means. If Int is reduced to zero, two 
levels of Psionic Trauma are gained.
Powers Are Used in Rapid 
Succession
A character can use a single Power or combination of 
Powers, a number of times per day (or 24 hours period) 
equal to half his Int characteristic (rounded up). If this number 
is exceeded, he gains a level of Psionic Trauma. If he uses 
his Powers a number of times equal to his Int, two levels are 
gained and so forth.
Psionic Strength Points Are 
Exceeded
Psions may use all their Psionic Strength points and draw 
upon the Int and End characteristics to provide ‘reserve’ 
points on a like-for-like basis. Reducing Int obviously incurs 
Psionic Trauma; reducing Endurance does likewise and on 
the same basis: if Endurance is reduced to half its current 
level through funding Psionic Powers, a level of Psionic 
Trauma is accrued.
Mental or Emotional 
Experience, Exposure to 
Stress
These are circumstances the Referee must adjudicate. Any 
experience that might damage the mental or emotional state 
can lead to Psionic Trauma. One way of handling this is to 
assign the event an Intensity of between 2 and 12 or roll 
on 2d6. This is the target number, applying Int and Psionic 
Strength DMs, that must be successfully rolled, to avoid a level 
of Psionic Trauma being accrued. Alternatively, the Referee 
may decide that a particular experience is so profound, 
stressful or shocking that a level is accrued automatically.
Effects of Psionic Trauma
Each level of Psionic Trauma has the following game 
effects:
• Imposes a –1 DM to all Psionic Talents.
• Adds +1 to the Psi Strength when using a Psionic 
Power.
For example, Psi Judge Travis, has 2 Levels of 
Psionic Trauma and has Telepathy 1. When using 
Telepathy he suffers a –2 DM to his roll and any 
Power has +2 added to its Psionic Strength cost.
Psionic Trauma Levels
Levels of Psionic Trauma Mental Instability results on Frequency of Mental Instability Check
1-2 (Low Level Psionic Trauma) 11+ Every Three Months
3-4 (Medium Level Psionic Trauma) 9+ Every Month
5-6 (High Level Psionic Trauma) 7+ Every Week

===PAGE 199===
 Thought Crimes
198
As previously stated, Psionic Trauma has a maximum of 
six levels before Mental Instability becomes a real risk. The 
Psionic Trauma Levels table outlines how this works.
The traumatised psion must, at the stated period, roll 2d6 
against the Mental Instability target number. No DMs are 
applied. If the target number is met or exceeded, then the 
character gains a Mental Instability.
Treating Psionic Trauma
Psionic Trauma cannot be alleviated without treatment. The 
options are as follows:
Psychiatric Care
One month of dedicated psychiatric care and convalescence is 
required per level of Psionic Trauma. At the end of the period, 
the psion rolls Int 8+ with DMs for Medic and Life Sciences 
(psychology) skills (delivered through trained, psychiatric 
experts and staff). For every additional month the psion 
remains in voluntary care, a further +1 DM is applied. If the roll 
is successful, then the level of Psionic Trauma is removed.
For example, Judge Travis admits himself for treatment at 
Psi Division. He is suffering from 2 levels of Psionic Trauma 
and so his treatment will take two months. His care team 
includes a psychologist with Life Sciences (psychology) 2. 
His Int is 7. Travis decides that he will stay for three months, 
rather than just two, to ensure he emerges as well as 
possible. He must therefore roll 5+ on 2d6. He succeeds, 
rolling 8 and, after three months convalescence, emerges 
mentally ﬁ t and well.
Drugs
In the absence of residential convalescence, certain drugs 
are available that either block or cure Psionic Trauma; these 
are described in the Psionic Equipment chapter, beginning 
on page 203. Relying on drugs alone usually requires more 
time to cure Psionic Trauma and drugs can be combined 
with psychiatric care to improve the chances of recovery.
Substance Abuse
Narcotics that dull the senses can suppress the effects of 
Psionic Trauma but do not remove it. In the long-term they 
may increase the chances of Psionic Trauma returning and, 
of course, the psion risks becoming reliant on alcohol or 
drugs simply to make it through the day, along with the other 
unwanted side effects of substance addiction.
Relying on substance abuse works in one of three ways:
• The substance used negates the DMs to using Talents 
and increases to Psionic Strength point costs.
• The Mental Instability check period is extended – but 
the target number is reduced.
• A combination of the two.
The Referee should decide in which of the ways a substance 
will work. Some guidance is given below:
Substance
Effect on DMs to Talents and Psi 
Points
Effect on Mental Instability 
checks
Alcohol, Mild psychoactive drugs. Psionic Trauma is considered to be one 
level lower.
Mental Instability checks remain as 
normal for the level of Psionic Trauma 
for the ﬁ  rst six months. Thereafter, 
checks as follows:
Low Level: 10+, Every Month
Medium Level: 8+, Every Week
High Level: 6+, Every Day.
Strong psychoactive drugs. No penalty to Talents or Power costs. Mental Instability checks remain as 
normal for the level of Psionic Trauma 
for the ﬁ  rst six months. Thereafter, 
checks as follows:
Low Level: 10+, Every Month
Medium Level: 8+, Every Week
High Level: 6+, Every Day.
Opiates (or equivalent). No penalty to Talents or Power costs. Mental Instability check intervals 
remain as normal. Target for Mental 
Instability is as follows:
Low Level: 9+, Medium Level: 7+, High 
Level: 5+.

===PAGE 200===
 Thought Crimes
199
The table does not take into account levels of addiction and 
side effects of abuse and addiction. Referees must handle 
these additional conditions according to their own judgement 
and campaign requirements.
Continued substance abuse may also become ineffective 
after time, as the body and mind becomes inured to the 
palliative effects of the substance. Again, Referees should 
decide at what point Psionic Trauma can no longer be 
controlled through self-medication.
 Mental Instability
Mental Instability results from Psionic Trauma but runs 
parallel to it and must be treated separately. A character can 
have Psionic Trauma cured but Mental Instability may still 
remain (or both might be treated together – it depends on 
the care).
A Mental Instability is accrued when the Mental Instability 
target number, resulting from Psionic Trauma, is equalled or 
2d6 Instability Behavioural Effects Game Effects
2 Phobia The character becomes irrationally 
afraid of certain situations, activities, 
things or people. The main symptom 
of this disorder is the excessive, 
unreasonable desire to avoid the 
feared subject.
Assign the phobia an intensity of 
between 2 and 12 (or roll 2d6). When 
the character encounters the source 
of the phobia he must roll over the 
target number, with DMs for Int+Life 
Sciences (psychology) or Survival to 
react calmly and rationally around it. 
If he fails, the character will go out 
of his way to avoid the subject, with 
the Effect determining the degree 
of reaction (hysterics, tears, panic 
attacks and so forth) and the DM 
that must be applied to any skills the 
character wishes to use whilst in the 
presence of the phobia’s source.
3 Compulsion/Obsession The character becomes ﬁ xated with 
a certain person, place, situation, 
routine and so on. The compulsion 
drives behaviour to the distraction 
of all else and, if particularly acute, 
dominates the character’s life.
Assign the condition an intensity 
of between 2 and 12 (or roll 2d6). 
The character must roll this number 
or higher, with a DM for End or be 
forced to engage in obsessive/
compulsive behaviour whenever 
in the presence of a trigger or in a 
particular situation. The Effect of the 
failed roll is the DM applied to all 
skills that may need to be used whilst 
the condition is prevalent. Once the 
obsession or compulsion has been 
satisﬁ ed, then the character may 
behave normally.
exceeded on 2d6. There are several instabilities and the one 
the character suffers may be chosen by the Referee or rolled 
for randomly. The game and roleplaying/behavioural effects 
of each instability are quantiﬁ ed below:
Treating Mental Instability
Mental instability typically requires long-term treatment, 
convalescence and drugs. Many sufferers go through life 
without requiring treatment, depending on the condition’s 
intensity but those who struggle to control the condition 
require detailed care.
Where a condition has been assigned an intensity, it takes 
a number of months equal to twice the intensity to treat the 
condition effectively. If the condition is of intensity 4 or below, 
then hospitalisation is not required and the sufferer can be 
treated as an outpatient. Intensity 5-7 requires equal parts 
of hospitalisation and remote care and intensity 8+ always 
requires hospitalisation.

===PAGE 201===
 Thought Crimes
200
4 Paranoia Paranoia typically includes persecutory 
beliefs concerning perceived threats, 
conspiracy theories and an underlying 
belief that others, seen or unseen, 
intend harm in some way.
Assign the condition an intensity 
of between 2 and 12 (or roll 2d6). 
The character must roll this number 
or higher, with a DM for Int+Psi, to 
avoid paranoid feelings overcoming 
him whenever he is in the presence 
of something that might trigger 
a paranoia attack or a stressful 
situation. The Effect of the failed 
roll is the DM applied to all skills 
that may need to be used whilst 
the paranoia is prevalent. Once it, 
or the character, is removed then 
the paranoia subsides. The Effect 
also indicates the level of behaviour 
the character exhibits when faced 
with a potential source of paranoia 
(mistrust, anger, panic attacks, ﬂ ight 
response and so forth)
5 Bipolar Disorder Extreme mood swings, veering 
between high elation, ‘normal’ 
behaviour and deep depression. 
A mood swing can occur at any 
time but typically in response to 
events that cause either excitement, 
disappointment or anxiety.
The Referee should decide when 
a trigger event may result in a 
bipolar swing. The character then 
needs to roll End+Int 8+ to control 
the swing to either elation or 
depression. Elation results in the 
character becoming hyperactive 
and histrionic, prone to wild bursts 
of enthusiasm. Depression results 
in feelings of dejection and social 
withdrawal which may verge on the 
suicidal. The Effect of the roll will 
determine the degree of severity of 
either swing.
6 Schizophrenia Schizophrenia is a combination 
of delusions, hallucinations and 
sometimes imaginary voices. The 
sufferer usually has trouble in 
communicating ideas clearly and feels 
uncomfortable in social situations. 
Schizophrenia is in constant operation 
and has no particular trigger. Sufferers 
can control the symptoms when they 
are calm and not placed in stressful 
situations. Equally, they may simply 
lapse into a schizophrenic state with 
no apparent trigger.
Assign the condition an intensity 
of between 2 and 12 (or roll 2d6). 
The character must roll this number 
or higher, with a DM for End+Psi, 
to avoid suffering a schizophrenic 
episode when placed in any kind 
of stress. The Effect of the failed 
roll determines what the character 
experiences, ranging from panic 
attacks, through hallucinations 
and to hearing imaginary voices or 
suffering from dangerous delusions 
about their own abilities.
2d6 Instability Behavioural Effects Game Effects

===PAGE 202===
 Thought Crimes
201
7 Delusions Delusional characters believe that 
their capabilities are far higher 
and greater than they are and 
generally far greater and higher 
than anyone else’s. Delusions of 
power, attractiveness or prowess 
in a particular skill and so on, lead 
them to make wild boasts, outlandish 
claims and rash, dangerous decisions 
that may threaten themselves and 
others. Delusion sufferers who attain 
positions of power generally abuse it, 
to the detriment of others.
There are no speci ﬁ c game effects 
for Delusions. The Referee and 
Player should discuss the type of 
delusional behaviour to be exhibited 
and may, if they wish, agree an 
Intensity, that indicates the lengths 
to which they will go in pursuing 
their delusions and the extremes of 
behaviour that accompany them.
8 Hallucinations The character experiences audio 
and visual hallucinations, usually 
during times of stress or tiredness. 
The hallucinations may be acute and 
terrifying or ﬂ eeting and insubstantial. 
However they are usually distracting 
and may trigger compulsive/obsessive 
episodes.
Assign the condition an intensity 
of between 2 and 12 (or roll 2d6). 
The character must roll this number 
or higher, with a DM for End+Psi, 
to avoid suffering a hallucinatory 
episode during a stressful or 
emotional time. The Effect of the 
failed roll indicates the strength of 
the hallucination and the way the 
character responds to it. The Effect 
also imposes a negative DM on 
cognitive skills.
9 Thought Disorder Thought Disorders disturb the ability 
to communicate verbally and in 
writing; sufferers stumble over words, 
cannot get words out or may be 
rendered mute for a time. Similarly 
they struggle to read and write, often 
writing gibberish or perceiving the 
written word as gibberish. The sufferer 
may make socially inappropriate 
or embarrassing remarks without 
realising it or overly rely on expletives 
and crude innuendo, believing it to be 
entirely acceptable.
Assign the condition an intensity of 
between 1 and 6. This is the DM 
applied to all verbal and written 
communication skills, including 
such skills as Broker and Diplomat. 
The condition may be variable – in 
which case the DM is rolled on 1d6 
from one communication instance to 
another.
10 Delirium Delirium is an acute decline in the 
ability to focus attention, exercise 
clear perception, understand and 
follow commands and general 
problems with cognition. Sufferers 
may lose the ability to communicate, 
understand communication, conduct 
straightforward tasks of reasoning or 
even complete simple tasks such as 
counting or dressing.
Assign the condition an intensity of 
between 1 and 6. This is the DM 
applied all skills possessed by a 
character and applied to untrained 
skill attempts (creating a DM of 
between –4 and –9). If delirium is of 
intensity 6, then the character simply 
cannot communicate at all and may 
be ﬁ xed in a semi-comatose daze.
2d6 Instability Behavioural Effects Game Effects

===PAGE 203===
 Thought Crimes
202
11 Combine two results, 
ignoring Psychosis
12 Psychosis Psychosis is the acute disconnection 
from reality. Sufferers experiencing 
psychotic episodes may experience 
hallucinations or delusional beliefs 
(see those entries in this table) and 
may exhibit complete changes in 
personality. This may be accompanied 
by unusual or bizarre behaviour, as 
well as difﬁ culty with social interaction 
and impairment in carrying out the 
activities of daily living.
Psychotics take the game effects 
for Delusion. In addition, roll 1d6 for 
what additional effects they suffer:
1-2 – No additional effect
3 – Hallucinations
4 – Delirium
5 – Thought Disorder
6 – Schizophrenia
2d6 Instability Behavioural Effects Game Effects


===PAGE 204===
 Thought Crimes
203
No rolls are required to remove the condition but expertise in 
Medic and Life Sciences (psychology) reduces the number of 
months required for treatment by their skill levels. Treatment 
must be undergone for the full term; if it is broken, then the 
sufferer is not cured and suffers a relapse to the condition’s 
previous intensity. At the end of the term, the character 
must roll Int+End 9+. If successful, the condition has been 
successfully cured. If unsuccessful, then the character is 
cured but requires drugs to keep the condition fully at bay. 
If drugs are not taken, there is an End 9+ chance that the 
condition will return with a new intensity (but reduced by the 
character’s End and Int DMs).
 Insanity
Insanity is a mental instability so deep-rooted that the 
character is completely unable to function in society and 
poses a constant danger to himself and others.
Any character that has a mental instability condition that 
goes untreated sees that condition increase in intensity by 1 
for every year it is left untreated. Once the intensity reaches 
12 or higher, the character is clinically insane. He loses all 
ability to control his condition and he effectively withdraws 
from society – and may become suicidal or homicidal. The 
only safe way to treat an insane person is to con ﬁ ne them 
and subject them to intensive, long-term treatment. The 
treatment period is half the intensity level of the condition 
+2d6 in years. Some insane characters, depending on age, 
may never be cured.
Player Characters in a truly insane condition may be retired 
from play at the Referee’s discretion – although insane 
characters do provide some interesting opportunities for 
roleplaying (and insane Non-Player Characters always 
do).
 Psionic 
Equipment
All psionic equipment is licensed by the Justice Department. 
Naturally, possession of unlicensed psionic equipment 
results in a spell (5 years and upwards) in the iso-cubes. 
The equipment listed here is the most common range of 
items that are available to Psi Division from its stores and 
through co-operation with the Tek and Med Divisions; but 
also on the black market through the Mob and unscrupulous 
Psyk-Skools. The cost in Credits is the suggested cost for 
someone attempting to gain a piece of equipment on the 
black market: Referees may double, triple or even quadruple 
these costs if they feel it is appropriate.
Anti-Psi Spray
An aerosol neutraliser, the Ant-Psi Spray projects a cloud of 
nano-particles, 1 metre in diameter, into the air. The nano 
particles are molecularly calibrated to absorb psionic energy 
and dissipate it harmlessly. Every blast of the spray neutralises 
3+1d6 Psionic Strength points placed into an active Power 
that must be directed through the cloud’s area of effect. The 
cloud itself dissipates after 1+1d6 Combat Rounds.
A standard canister of spray provides 5 bursts.
Anti-Psi Spray Cost: Cr. 5,000 per canister.
Aura Array
This headset device can be used by non-psions and replicates 
the Read Aura Power of the Aura Perception Talent (see 
page 185) at level 0. The user can see and interpret psionic 
auras but cannot manipulate, mask or project them.
Aura Array Cost: Cr. 10,000.
Disruption Unit
This small unit emits a constant electro-psionic ﬁ eld that 
disrupts psionics within its sphere of in ﬂ uence. The unit 
carries a 100-point charge, with its operation drawing on this 
charge at the rate of 1 point per minute. The maximum setting 
is variable between 1 and 6 points, with each point applying 
a negative DM to all psionic use equal to the points setting. 
The disruption unit affects an area of 3 metres radius. The 
unit can be recharged from a standard power source, taking 
1 minute per point to recharge.
Disruption Unit Cost: Cr. 20,000.
Image Sliver
Image Slivers are psionically calibrated data wafers that 
can record and store psionically obtained data: thoughts, 
emotions, auras, memories, nightmares and so forth. The 
sliver is a blue-black data wafer 5mm x 5mm in length and 
width. It can store up to 10 hours of recorded thoughts, 
memories or emotions or the aura signatures of 10 people. 
Non-psions can access the material recorded on the sliver 
by inserting it into a standard neural interface jack if they are 
suitably augmented; psions can access the information in a 
similar way or, if they have the Telepathy or Clairvoyance 
Talents, simply by holding the sliver and spending a single 
Psi Point whilst concentrating on the sliver.
Non-psions who access a sliver ﬁ nd the information 
strange, random and often disturbing. The senses are 

===PAGE 205===
 Thought Crimes
204
ﬂ ooded with the recorded data and the feedback taps into 
the emotional areas of the brain to transfer the recording. 
The imagery found even in the most placidly recorded 
thoughts can introduce sensory overload and so End 9+ 
rolls are required otherwise the character suffers a –1 DM 
to all skills for a period of minutes equal to the length of 
the recording as they seek to adjust to the information they 
have downloaded. Memories, emotions and other data 
may also resurface at random intervals even after the sliver 
has been removed for 1d6 days after being accessed, with 
effects that need to be adjudicated by the Referee. Psions 
are attuned to the way mental data is recorded and do not 
suffer from these effects.
Image Sliver Cost: Cr. 250.
Inhibitor Drug
Psionic inhibitors dampen the brain’s ability to generate 
psychic effects. A character who takes (or, more often, is 
forcibly injected with) an inhibitor drug suffers a –4 DM to all 
Psionic Strength checks and cannot regain Psionic Strength 
points. Each hour the character may make an Endurance 
check to throw off the effects of the drug with a +1 DM for 
every previous check. Inhibitor drugs have no effect on non-
psionic individuals. 
Inhibitor Drug Cost: Cr. 5,000 per dose.
Mind Reader
A device for non-psions, a Mind Reader is a headset device 
that is worn by the user and linked to electrodes that are 

===PAGE 206===
 Thought Crimes
205
by the psion during rest periods (Psi Points being channelled 
into the battery rather than into the psion’s own mind, which 
will therefore increase the length of any rest period if the 
psion wants to regain his full Psi Points compliment).
A psion can draw on up to 3 points from the battery at a 
time. If not used, stored Psi Points degrade and are lost. 
Degradation begins after 3 days with 1 point being lost per 
day until the battery is empty.
PPB Cost: Cr. 30,000.
Psi Detector
For use by non-psionics, the psi detector is a hand-held 
device that detects residual or active psi energy within a 
radius of 500 metres. Where active psi energy is detected 
(in other words, Psionic Powers are in use), the detector can 
provide an indication of the amount of psi energy involved; 
the indication is low, medium and high, relating to the number 
of psi points invested in the particular Power under use.
For residual energy, the reading will always be low but 
retrograde analysis on rates of decay can offer a general 
indication of how long ago a Power was used, with an 
accuracy of up to 3 hours.
Psi Detector Cost: Cr. 12,000.
Psi-Drugs
These drugs restore Psionic Strength if taken when the 
character has already spent Psionic Strength points or 
temporarily increase the character’s Psionic Strength if 
taken when he is at full Psionic Strength. 
A character who takes more than one dose of Standard or 
Double Psi-Drug or a single dose of the Special drug must 
make an Endurance check, with a –1 DM per dose of psi-
drug taken in the last week (not including the one just taken). 
If the check is failed the character falls ill with a serious fever, 
suffering 3d6 damage and permanently reducing his Psionic 
Strength by 1.
connected to the temples or skull of 
the subject. The device provides the 
user with temporary psionic abilities, 
allowing him to read thoughts and 
emotions as though a psion with a 
skill level of 0 in Telepathy.
Mind Reader Cost: Cr. 50,000.
Mind Switch 
Device
A device that it is rumoured Psi 
Division possesses – but never 
proven. This device exchanges 
the minds of two subjects, in 
the same way as the Tapping 
Talent of Mind Switch (see page 
193). For the mind switch to be 
successful, the operator must roll 
Electronics or Computers 8+ to 
operate the device, with the Int 
DM of any unwilling participants 
acting as a negative DM for the 
skill roll.
The mind switch has a safe limit 
of a number of hours equal to the 
Effect of the machine operation 
roll, multiplied by the result of a 2d6 
throw. If minds are not swapped 
back at the end of this time, both 
subjects begin to accrue 1 level of 
Psionic Trauma for each 6 hour period 
thereafter.
Mind Switch Device Cost: Cr. 250,000 
(limited availability).
Personal Psi Battery (PPB)
A Personal Psi Battery stores Psionic Strength points for later 
use. A battery can hold up to 10 Psi Points and is charged 
Drug TL
Psionic Strength 
Restored
Psionic Strength 
Boosted Cost (Cr.)
Standard 8 3 2 1,000
Double 9 6 4 4,000
Special 10 9 6 10,000
Extra Special 12 12 10 100,000

===PAGE 207===
 Thought Crimes
206
Psi Enhancer
Available either as a skull implant (in which the enhancer 
circuits are etched directly into the skull) or as an external, 
battery-powered headset-like array, the Psi Enhancer 
improves the Psionic Strength DM – but not the Psi Points 
– by +1 for every level of complexity. Psi Enhancers are 
necessarily expensive; especially for the implant option.
An implanted enhancer requires a surgical procedure as the 
circuitry needs to be physically wired to the brain. Psions 
undergoing the operation must throw Endurance 8+ (with DMs 
for the levels of medical expertise performing the operation) to 
avoid complications. If the roll is failed, check the effect on the 
table below to determine the nature of the complications:
Effect Complication
 4 Brain Damage: lose 1d6+1 Int. If Int is reduced to 
0, patient is left in a persistent vegetative state.
 3 Brain Damage: lose 1d3 Int.
 2 2 Levels of Psionic Trauma.
 1 1 Level of Psionic Trauma.
External Psi Enhancer Cost: Cr. 50,000 per level. 
Implanted Psi Enhancer Cost: Cr. 80,000 per level, plus 
hospital and surgery costs.
Psi Scanner
This device scans the brain to determine psionic potential. The 
device connects to the skull of the subject via electrodes and 
conducts a deep, highly intense, highly accurate EEG scan 
speciﬁ cally focused on detecting latent Psionic Strength.
If the subject has untrained psionic capability, the scanner 
detects it in a roll of 8+, with DMs for Medic or other, 
appropriate science skills.
Psi Scanner Cost: Cr. 10,000.
Psionic Shield
Any armour incorporating a helmet or hood can be outﬁ tted with 
a psionic shield, which blocks Telepathy. Unlike the Telepathy 
Power, Shield, a technological shield is invulnerable to assault 
and blocks Send Thoughts. It cannot be lowered without 
removing the helmet or hood containing the shield. Buildings 
and vehicles can also be psionically shielded but this is much 
more costly, increasing the cost by 10%. 
Psionic Shield Cost: Cr. 40,000.
Talent Chip
A speciﬁ c Psionic Talent is encoded onto a data wafer that 
is accessed via either a Psi Enhancer or a standard neural 
interface. Note that a Talent Chip will not confer a Psionic 
Talent on someone who is none psionic.
The chip gives the psion the Talent at level 0. The cost is 
based on how many Powers are included as part of the 
chip’s data array.
Talent Chip Cost: Basic Talent, Cr. 20,000 + Cr. 2,000 
per Power; Advanced Talent, Cr. 50,000 + Cr. 3,000 per 
Power.
Trauma Grenade
A speciﬁ cally anti-psion device, this psychoactive grenade, 
when it explodes, induces Psionic Trauma in any psions 
caught in its blast radius of 3+1d6 metres. Psions must throw 
End+Psi 10+ to withstand the unleashing of the trauma-
inducing energy or suffer 1+1d3 levels of Psionic Trauma.
Trauma Grenade Cost: Cr. 3,000
Trauma Suppressant
These drugs are designed to suppress Psionic Trauma. The 
drugs come in six strengths, corresponding to the levels of 
Psionic Trauma. One level of strength suppresses one level 
of trauma; thus, to suppress two levels of Psionic Trauma, a 
Level 2 Suppressant needs to be taken.
The drug does not cure Psionic Trauma; it merely controls 
its effects allowing a psion to live a normal, everyday life. 
However, the body and mind can become inured to the 
drug’s effects; for every month, roll End+Psi 9+. If the roll 
succeeds then the body begins to resist the drug’s effects 
and it will require a strength of suppressant one level higher 
than actually needed or desired to suppress trauma.
Trauma Suppressants have some physical side effects. 
These start to manifest within a month of taking the drug. 
Roll 1d6 and add the drug’s strength to determine the speciﬁ c 
side effect. The side effect only needs to be rolled once but 
as stronger levels of drug are taken, the side effects become 
more acute and evident.
Trauma Suppressant Cost: Cr. 1,000 per level of strength, 
per monthly dose.


===PAGE 208===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 209===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
208
Adding 
Strangeness 
to Judge 
Dredd Games
There really should be no limit to the strangeness ﬁ nding 
its way into Judge Dredd settings. In his time Dredd has 
encountered inter-dimensional entities, ghosts, zombies, 
giants, the most peculiar crazes and the most warped 
mutants. Judges in your campaigns should too – but these 
things should be used sparingly. Judges have enough on 
their plates handling the thousands of ‘normal’ crimes 
committed in their sectors every day and the truly bizarre 
should be introduced every so often, to keep the challenges 
fresh, rather than on a regular basis, which would limit their 
impact.
But there really is nothing that is off-limits for a Judge 
Dredd campaign: forget scienti ﬁ c accuracy – anything and 
everything happens in Mega-City One and not always with 
a rational, or indeed any, explanation. Even the Tek and Psi 
Divisions are frequently bafﬂ ed by the things they encounter. 
Citizens, meddling with things they should not, are often 
the cause for strife and bloodshed: boredom plays a large 
part, as does morbid or even sinister curiosity. For reasons 
inexplicable to man, reality can be bent, distorted and broken 
resulting in many of the bizarre and dangerous things Mega-
City One experiences from time to time.
So, ludicrous, unscienti ﬁ c, extremes can and do, af ﬂ ict 
Mega-City One on a not-infrequent basis and Judge Dredd 
Referees should not feel constrained by creating totally 
rational, logical or scienti ﬁ cally based explanations or 
justiﬁ cations. Judge Dredd’s world is a heightened, fantastic 
twist on our own. It is a glorious parody on every ﬁ ctional and 
SF trope available, sprinkled liberally with black humour and 
a knowing wink to the audience.
 Aliens
Mankind has clearly gone to the stars in Judge Dredd’s 
saga. A good portion of the ‘Judge Child’ epic takes Dredd 
across the galaxy, encountering all manner of aliens and 
supernatural creatures along the way. This book does not 
have the space to cover all the alien races documented in 
the Judge Dredd saga, although future books and articles 
may well do so. However, aliens are known, traded with and 
warred with. Some of the best known are documented below 
but guidance is also given on creating aliens for use in Judge 
Dredd campaigns.
Mega-City One’s tourist industry bene ﬁ ts from no import 
quite as much as it does from the extraterrestrials who ﬂ ood 
the city a hundred million times a year to get a taste of the 
Big Meg, see the Judges in action, get tapped, take a few 
snapshots and then return home with thrilling tales to tell 
their clutch-mates. Custom-built hotels like the Giger Plaza 
house these alien visitors, specially furnished to cater to their 
environmental and cultural needs. Apartments exist pre-
conﬁ gured for the more frequent tourist species such as the 
Geeks from Geekus 2 and the Uqqan from Qu (major Mega-
City One trading partners). Tourist species are required to 
remain among those of their kind for the duration of their 
holiday so that they may avoid clashes with incompatible 
galactic neighbours. Translators hired from the tourist party’s 
own species facilitate friendly communication between the 
aliens and the people of Mega-City One. 
All aliens have their intergalactic passports checked by 
Eustace Fargo Spaceport Customs on arrival and visas 
are granted for periods up to 30 days. Extensions to that 
time limit must be applied for through the Alien Bureau. 
Suspicious cases are passed over to the Alien Bureau’s 
Justice Department wing for a full comp-ident examination, 
including a personal history and criminal record beamed 
straight from the visitor’s home world. Illegal aliens or those 
determined to pose a threat to the city will be detained in 
the nearby Alien Penitentiary until extradition papers can be 
arranged. 
Not all of the illegal aliens are so easy to detect. Some 
determined souls desperate to escape their former lives, 
seeking sanctuary in Mega-City One, manage to smuggle 
themselves into the city via cargo shuttles, hiding in crates or 
otherwise using strange alien powers to mask their presence 
from customs sensors. However, on leaving the spacecraft, 
the alien soon realises he has few options open to him but 
to make his way to Alientown where so many of his fellow 
immigrants have found themselves effectively imprisoned. 
Unable to establish a decent lifestyle for themselves, 
the Alientownees struggle to hide from frequent Justice 
Department sweeps and the consequential arrest and 
deportation. Alientown is so large and its denizens so hard 
to catch that the Judges have no choice but to tolerate its 
existence, so long as the inhabitants keep to themselves. 
Illegal aliens are not entitled to receive welfare payments 
or healthcare so must ﬁ nd ways to become self-suf ﬁ cient. 
Though the Judges may once in a while turn a blind eye, 
a xenophobic fringe movement known as the Grand Earth 
Council (GEC) are dedicated to ridding their city of the aliens 
by any means including arson and murder. The Judges are 
sworn to protect the aliens from the GEC attacks out of duty, 
not because they support their presence. 

===PAGE 210===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
209
Life is not too tough, for aliens are granted Mega-City 
One citizenship after living in the city for ﬁ ve years without 
earning a criminal record, but job opportunities are just as 
slim as they are for human citizens. Alien Welfare Of ﬁ cers 
work alongside applicant citizens to help ease their way 
into mainstream society. One success story is AlienLine; a 
taxi ﬁ rm founded by aliens that only employs off-worlders. 
Human citizens like the novelty of being driven about town 
by pulsating slime moulds and Zilusian Swamp-Creatures 
and pay that little bit extra for the experience! Apart from the 
odd tourist party, aliens are not that common a sight on the 
streets of Mega-City One. Most citizens will have only seen 
aliens from the comfort of their apartments watching ‘bug 
ﬂ icks’ on their Tri-D sets or visiting the world famous Alien 
Zoo with its many bizarre and monstrous exhibits.
Creating Aliens
The system for creating aliens used in the Traveller Core 
Rulebook (page 41) applies to Judge Dredd. Referees 
should design aliens that meet the need of a particular story 
but, if necessary, they can be generated randomly, using the 
system below.
All aliens use 2d6 as the basis for generating the core 
Traveller characteristics. However, roll 2d6 to determine if 
any characteristics are modiﬁ ed:
2d6 Result
2 Three characteristics are rolled on 1d6 rather 
than 2d6. Determine which three randomly:
1: Str, 2: Dex, 3: End, 4: Int, 5: Edu, 6: Soc.
3-5 As above but two characteristics are rolled on 1d6.
6-8 No characteristic modi ﬁ cation.
9-10 Two characteristics are rolled on 2d6+6. Determine 
which two randomly, using the chart above.
11 Three characteristics are rolled on 2d6+6. 
Determine which three randomly, using the 
chart above.
12 All characteristics are rolled on 2d6+6. 
Additionally, if the Int score is 15 or higher, the 
alien is also psionic and has a Psionic Strength 
score of 2d6, plus 1d3 Psionic Talents (use the 
range of Talents from the Thought Crimes 
chapter, beginning on page 184).
Next, roll 2d6 and note the Effect by subtracting 8 from the 
result. If the Effect is 0 or negative, then the alien has no alien 
traits. If the Effect is positive, then the alien has that number of 
alien traits, either chosen or rolled randomly on 2d6 using the 
Effect as a DM. The traits correspond with those found in the 
section on Aliens in the Traveller Core Rulebook.
Finally, determine the alien’s skills. Every alien has six skills, 
distributed as follows:
1 skill at level 3
2 skills at level 2
2 skills at level 1
1 skill at level 0
Skills can be chosen to match the alien’s purpose or 
environment or rolled randomly:
Alien Skills
d66 Skill
12 Advocate
13 Athletics
14 Art
15 Astrogation
16 Broker
21 Comms
22 Computers
23 Deception
24 Diplomat
25 Drive
26 Engineer
31 Explosives
32 Flyer
33 Gambler
34 Gunner
35 Gun Combat
36 Heavy Weapons
41 Investigate
42 Language
43 Leadership
44 Mechanic
45 Melee
46 Navigation
51 Persuade
52 Pilot
53 Recon
54 Science
55 Seafarer
56 Sensors
61 Stealth
62 Steward
63 Survival
64 Tactics
65 Vacc Suit
66 Zero G

===PAGE 211===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
210
2d6 Trait Description
3 Aquatic As per the trait on page 41 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
4 Armoured The alien has 1d6 points of natural armour. Roll 1d6 to determine the nature 
of the armour:
1: Thick hide, 2: Scales, 3: Crystal or chitin, 4: Fur, 5: Natural energy ﬁ eld, 
6: Cybernetic implants.
5 Atmospheric Requirements As per the trait on page 41 of the Traveller Core Rulebook but roll 1d6 
to determine the alien’s atmospheric needs:
1: Methane, 2: Carbon monoxide, 3: Pure oxygen, 4: Nitrogen, 5: Pure 
hydrogen, 6: A combination of any two of the above.
6 Engineered As per the trait on page 41 of the Traveller Core Rulebook. Roll 1d6 to 
determine why/how the alien has been engineered:
1: As a foodstuff, 2: As slaves/servants, 3: As soldiers/warriors, 4: As 
ambassadors/diplomats, 5: As merchants, 6: As spies.
7 Fast Metabolism As per the trait on page 41 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
8 Feral As per the trait on page 41 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
9 Flyer As per the trait on page 41 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
10 Large As per the trait on page 41 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
11 Mineral Digester The alien eats and digests rocks, minerals and metals, shunning organic 
food. Its is equipped with teeth and claws capable of cracking through its 
food stuffs, meaning that it naturally has the Natural Weapons trait.
12 Mutant-Like Traits The alien has 1d3 traits chosen from the table of Mutation Traits, found in 
this chapter on page 215.
13 Natural Weapon As per the trait on page 41 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
14 No Fine Manipulators As per the trait on page 41 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
15 Slow Metabolism As per the trait on page 42 of the Traveller Core Rulebook.
16 Xenophobic The alien hates all other life forms and is always antagonistic towards them. 
It is not necessarily aggressive but it never trusts any but its own species. If 
the chance to harm another species becomes available, then it takes it.
Aliens abroad in Mega-City One are generally equipped 
with Cr. 1,000x1d6, clothes, a carryall of some form, any 
special environmental equipment they need and a glazed 
expression.
 Crazies
People go crazy in Mega-City One for all kinds of reasons. 
The most common is Future Shock, creating ‘Futsies’ 
– the condition whereby the sheer strain of life in the 22
nd 
Century overwhelms the psyche, driving the sufferer into a 
violent, uncontrollable rage directed at other citizens and the 
trappings of Mega-City One life. However, there are other 
psychological conditions that grip citizens and these are 
outlined below.
‘Dredd’ Syndrome
Sufferers of ‘Dredd’ syndrome are gripped by the absolute 
conviction that the Judges, usually Dredd (being the city’s 
highest pro ﬁ le lawman), are actively hunting them down 
and will catch them for crimes they either committed years 
before, have contemplated committing or might commit in 
the future. Dredd Syndromists cannot sleep; their nightmares 
are plagued with the recurring theme of an arrest by Judges, 
hideous torture and then the severest sentence imaginable. 
Sufferers need psychiatric help to be able to function in 
their day-to-day lives; otherwise, every time a sufferer sees 
a Judge, he must roll End 10+ to keep calm and not draw 
attention to himself. If he fails, he gives-out all the signals 
of a perp and automatically ﬂ ees in panic. He is generally 
a danger only to himself and if/when caught, becomes so 
overwhelmed by the experience that he withdraws into an 
almost total catatonic state and must be conﬁ ned to a psycho 
cube for extensive – and possibly indeﬁ nite – treatment.
2T(FRU)T
This bizarre disease gripped Mega-City Two prompting 
Dredd and Spikes Harvey Rotten to cross the Cursed Earth 

===PAGE 212===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
211
with the vaccine. The disease is virulent and reduces its 
sufferers into cannibalistic zombies who crave living, human 
ﬂ esh (the forbidden fruit) and will stop at nothing to taste 
it. The disease requires a successful End 10+ to fend-off if 
one is exposed to it. If the Endurance roll fails, the disease 
incubates for 2d6 days before rapidly kicking-in. Sufferers 
are overtaken by the desire to eat other humans and launch 
into a murderous frenzy, usually wielding knives, in a bid to 
sustain the craving. Sufferers gain +4 to Str and Dex as a 
result of the disease and Int is reduced to 1. Additionally, 
sufferers gain +4 to the Melee skill, reﬂ ecting their diseased 
desire to consume fresh, human ﬂ esh.
The 2T(FRU)T vaccine, developed by Med Division, is 
effective and those treated can be completely cured within 
2d6 days, if they are given the correct course of treatment.
Block Mania
A psychological disorder that compels the sufferer to 
develop a psychotic allegiance to their own city block and an 
irrational hatred for all other city blocks, leading to escalating 
levels of violence. Block Mania can be a form of mass 
hysteria, caused by those troublemakers who take perverse 
enjoyment in whipping-up inter-block violence. Block citizens 
can resist exposure to the hysteria by rolling Int 8+, realising 
the stupidity of running with the crowd. However, Block Mania 
can also be induced by exotic, psychotropic drugs of the kind 
used by Orlok the Assassin to bring Mega-City One to its 
knees in the run-up to the Apocalypse War. These drugs 
need to be administered either via food or a block’s water 
supply and, if citizens are exposed to Block Mania drugs, 
then an Int 11+ roll is needed to resist the effects.
Again, a vaccine has been developed by Med Division and, 
when administered, it counteracts Block Mania (as long as it 
is drug-induced) within 2d6 hours.
Future Shock
Futsies simply cannot cope with the strain of 22 nd Century 
life and snap, engaging in violent rampages against any 
who stand in their way. The triggers of futsism are not fully 
understood and the only cure is intensive psychotherapy over 
a course of 1d6+2 months. Sufferers gain +3 Str and Dex and 
Int is reduced to 2 as they launch frenzied attacks against 
anything that can be construed as representing a threat. 
The attacks continue until the sufferer has been restrained. 
Sedatives keep the sufferer calm whilst psychotherapy in a 
psyko cube is administered.
Lemming Syndrome
A form of mass hysteria that leads citizens, in their dozens, 
to simply walk to their deaths from the highest point of a city 
block they can reach. The cause is unknown but it is thought 
by Med Division that it is a form of Future Shock. One person 
suffering from Lemming Syndrome can attract others. A 
citizen can avoid contracting the syndrome by rolling Int 
6+; however, for every 6 sufferers preparing to jump, the 
target number rises by 1. So, if a citizen sees 36 or more 
fellow citizens preparing to hurl themselves into oblivion, 
he must throw Int 12+ to avoid being caught in the mania 
and following their example. Only restraint can prevent a 
Lemming sufferer from leaping to his messy fate.
Ludditism
Another form of Future Shock, but a milder one that is aimed 
solely at machines and robots. The trigger is usually the loss 
of a prized job to a computer or robot and a citizen in such 
a position must throw Int 6+ to avoid succumbing. Ludditism 
sends the sufferer into a psychotic, machine-wrecking 
rage for 3d6 hours, during which restraint is necessary. All 
machines are targets but people generally are not – unless 
they attempt to defend machines. The condition is treatable 
by 2-3 months of psyko cube therapy.
Mentalism
Some citizens are just plain crazy. They do not go in for 
the crazes of Mega-City One or succumb to the general 
despondency most citizens display daily. They are happy 
with their lot. They smile, whistle, act in an up-beat manner 
and generally attract the suspicion of everyone (including 
Judges) around them. Mentalists are willing to try most 
things suggested to them in a bid to be normal (i.e. gloomy, 
pessimistic and prone to crazes or just general boredom). 
Psychotherapy can help but generally mentalists are stuck 
with their afﬂ iction. They often believe that they are stuck 
in some form of dream, vid-show or even a comic-book 
rendition of their lives and recount their experiences to an 
imaginary audience, viewer or reader. Just like I’m doing 
now…
Petty Crime Addiction (PCA)
Petty Crime Addicts cannot help themselves from committing 
petty crimes. These generally involve mild, antisocial 
behaviour but the sufferer feels compelled to commit the 
offence even though he knows the consequences if caught. 
PCA sufferers must roll End 10+ to control their urges, 
whenever the opportunity for petty crime presents itself. 
PCA sufferers are sometimes dif ﬁ cult to diagnose and Med 
Division is not wholly convinced that the condition really 
exists – although groups like Perp Aid try to cure PCA 
sufferers through intensive group therapy. This can be 
effective but if a perp commits a at least three petty crime 
rampages within a short period of time, the recommended 
course of action is a lobotomy to ensure that all tendencies 
to offend are removed.

===PAGE 213===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
212
Rumour Zombies
Not unlike Block Mania or Lemming Syndrome, Rumour 
Zombies develop an irrational need to mete out vengeance 
on anyone who, according to rumour, has committed some 
form of crime or social outrage. Those with a tendency 
to believe rumours and act on them, must throw Int 6+ to 
ignore the growing sense of rumour-fuelled anger; however, 
for every 6 sufferers preparing to act, the target number 
rises by 1. So, if a citizen sees 36 or more fellow citizens 
preparing to take vengeance on some poor, innocent sap, 
he must throw Int 12+ to remain in control. Those who fail 
are driven to gang-up on, terrorise and even murder, the 
object of the rumours. The sufferer never knows why they 
act in this way and can never pinpoint the source of the 
rumour. If questioned, they simply know that ‘someone told 
someone that he did something…’ but the justi ﬁ cation is 
always vague. Treatment is 1d6 months of rumour aversion 
therapy in a psyko cube.
Stookie Gland Addiction
Stookie Gland addicts want to avoid aging – pure and 
simple. The addifax gland of the Stookie not only halts aging, 
it reverses it; one dose reverses physical aging by 2d6+3 
years. Unfortunately, Stookie gland serum is addictive; users 
must roll End 8+ to control cravings for the serum – and 
every ﬁ ve years retarded by the drug increases the target 
number for the roll by 1. Thus, a citizen who has gained 15 
years must roll End 11+ to control his addiction. After the 
ﬁ rst dose the effectiveness, in terms of the years gained, 
lessens. The second dose restores 2d6 years; the third 1d6; 
the fourth 1d3 and all subsequent doses offer only 1 year 
of age retardation. However, once a user has gained the 
equivalent of 21 years of youth, addiction is permanent; he 
has to continue taking the drug even though he gains very 
little youth. As the drug is illegal and supplies rare, addicts 
are pushed to ever-greater lengths to get their ﬁ x – and this 
usually means crime. If an addict cannot gain a dose of 
serum every month once he is addicted, he regains age at 
the rate of 1 year every 6 days. Addicts denied their ﬁ x can 
be dead within a few weeks as time catches up with them.
Med Division has synthetic addifax serum which is used 
to control the urges and is administered so that users can 
serve-out their sentences in the iso cubes. For many though, 
this is simply a death sentence, because, denied the real 
serum, they will rapidly return to their real age.
Umpty Candy Addiction
The most marvellous taste in the world, developed by 
the hapless Uncle Ump, is psychologically, rather than 
physically, addictive. The odd taste has no lasting effects 
but for every 6 bars consumed, the user must roll Int 8+ to 
avoid hallucinations. These hallucinations generally take 
the form of large, anthropomorphic Umpty Bars, dancing 
in a tantalising fashion before the sufferer. The sufferer is 
tempted into the dance, in the hope of gaining more candy. 
The treatment is enforced withdrawal and psychotherapy 
in a psyko cube (in addition to the sentence for Umpty 
Candy use).
 Fatties
The cult of ﬂ ab began as a by-product of the ‘ugly’ craze 
back in 2102 when a weight-increasing product called 
‘Flabbon’ ﬁ rst became commercially available. Flabbon 
offered lazy citizens the chance to take part in a craze 
of their own that did not demand any effort other than 
eating. Within months, a new sub-culture had ﬂ opped into 
the limelight, unimaginatively nicknamed ‘fatties.’ These 
champion scoffers were so obese that they required 
belliwheels to keep their gargantuan stomachs from 
dragging along the ﬂ oor. Fatties spent their days eating 
and drinking, dreaming of the day when they might have 
gained enough weight to compete in the Intercity Eating 
Championship where gut-busting fatties like Tony Tubbs 
have weighed in at a staggering two tons.
The craze has largely abated but fatties still exist. Eating 
is compulsive and fatties go to great lengths to gain food 
or Flabbon. Fatties consume everything they can see, 
consuming vast meals several times a day and using appetite 
stimulants increases hunger. Fatties are generally 100kg 
overweight (with the average weight being 80kg, fatties 
include all those of 180kg plus). For every 50kg over 200kg 
of weight, the fatty’s characteristics undergo the following 
modiﬁ cations:
Str –1
End +1
Dex –2
However, whilst still mobile and using a bellywheel, fatties 
can be a hazard – especially if they stampede after food. 
Any fatty must roll Int 10+ to curb his food cravings, if faced 
with the opportunity to eat. If he fails, he stampedes. The 
momentum of a stampeding fatty causes 2d6 +End DM 
damage to anyone who cannot get out of the way
All skills that have either a Strength or Dex-based component 
undergo a –1 DM for every 50kg of extra weight (or fraction 
thereof), above 100kg. Eventually, fatties cannot even 
move, becoming bed-ridden and even bellywheels will not 
help them.

===PAGE 214===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
213
 Mutants
The radiation of the Atomic War led to the widespread 
occurrences of mutation across great swathes of the 
population. Until recently, to prevent further corruption of the 
gene pool, all the Mega Cities of America forbade mutants 
from living within their walls, conﬁ ning them to the irradiated 
wastelands of the Cursed Earth.
Mutants have struggled for decades with this injustice. Some 
truly are evil and corrupt but many are innocent victims of 
a dreadful cataclysm, more deserving of sympathy than 
ostracism. Dredd ﬁ nally saw this after many visits to the 
Cursed Earth and his increasing sympathy led to a relaxation 
of the Mutant Act, which prevented mutants from setting foot 
in Mega-City One.
Mutants, or Muties as they are known pejoratively, are a 
common facet of Dredd’s America. They proliferate in the 
Cursed Earth, of course, but are also found within the walls 
of Mega-City One, where they are feared, pitied, hated and 
avoided in equal measure.
Mutation Rules
Any creature can be mutated. To create a mutant choose 
the kind of creature to mutate and follow the procedure 
given below, using the normal statistics for the creature but 
adjusting where necessary to give the desired result.
Severity of Mutation
First, determine the severity of the mutation using 2d6.
Effect on Characteristics
Next, when the severity of mutation has been established, decide 
which characteristics the mutation affects, then modify those 
characteristics according to the table below. Characteristics 
can be adjusted either positively or negatively, depending on 
the nature of the mutation (having no arms, for example, would 
lower Strength; having four might increase it).
Light  +/–1
Moderate  +/–1d3
Radical  +/–1d3+1
Severe  +/–1d3+2
Shambolic +/–1d3+3
Severity of Mutation
2d6 Severity De ﬁ nition
Number of 
Areas Affected Mutant Traits
2-3 Shambolic Looks more like a demon than human; may 
be exceedingly large, possessed of strange 
mental or physical abilities.
5 1d6+1
4-5 Severe A disturbing mutation; for example, two 
heads, a human-headed dog, a creature with 
tentacles in place of limbs or a face in its 
chest, with no discernible head.
4 1d6–1
6-7 Radical A bizarre mutation, such as more than the 
expected number of limbs or facial features; 
scaled skin perhaps or wings instead of arms.
3 1d3–1
8-9 Moderate A visible mutation: peculiar skin, prominent 
facial features, a limb attached in the wrong 
place but essentially the base creature.
20
10-12 Light A subtle mutation – six ﬁ ngers perhaps or 
taller/fatter/thinner than the norm or a mutation 
that can be easily concealed.
10

===PAGE 215===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
214
Mutated Area and 
Characteristics Affected
Roll 2d6 for the area and hence characteristics, affected. 
2d6 Area Characteristics Affected
2 Arms Strength, Dexterity.
3 Brain Intelligence, Psionic 
Strength (the mutant 
gains Psionic Strength of 
2d6 and any one talent 
available to Psi Judges: 
see the Thought 
Crimes chapter).
4 Chest Endurance, Dexterity.
5 Feet Strength, Dexterity.
6 Fingers Strength, Dexterity.
7 Hands Strength, Dexterity.
8 Head Intelligence, Endurance.
9 Legs Strength, Dexterity.
10 Neck Endurance, Dexterity.
11 Skin Endurance, Social 
Standing.
12 Torso Endurance, Dexterity.
Mutant Traits
Mutation is often more than skin deep and some mutants 
possess special abilities. To simulate these, roll for Mutant 
Traits as indicated by the Severity of Mutation table. The 
result provides the number of traits that are selected from 
the Mutation Traits table, on the following page. Note that 
mutation traits effects are in addition to beneﬁ ts or detriments 
gained as part of the severity of mutation.
Finally, determine the mutie’s skills. Every mutant has up to 
six skills, distributed as follows:
1 skill at level 3
2 skills at level 2
2 skills at level 1
1 skill at level 0
The skill levels can be combined but no skill should be above 
level 4. Skills can be chosen to match the mutie’s purpose 
or environment or rolled randomly – use the Alien Skill table 
on page 209.


===PAGE 216===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
215
Mutant Traits
Trait Effects
Absorbing The mutant drains 1d6 characteristic points when it comes into physical contact with an opponent. 
Roll for which characteristic points are drained randomly:
1: Strength, 2: Dexterity, 3: Endurance, 4: Intelligence, 5: Psionic Strength, 6: In ﬂ uence (for 
Judges) or Social Standing (by withering the appearance of the opponent).
Characteristic point drains are in addition to any normal physical damage the mutant inﬂ icts.
Acid Exuder The mutant exudes an acidic ichor which sprays whenever the skin is penetrated or which can 
be spat/squirted and so on, causing damage to the attacker; roll 1d6 to determine the strength 
of damage the acid inﬂ icts:
1: 1 point, 2: 1d3, 3: 1d3+1, 4: 1d6, 5: 1d6+1, 6: 2d6.
If squirting the acid or attempting to direct it with accuracy, the mutant must succeed in a Dex 8+ 
roll. It may use any skill it has in Natural Weapons as a DM to the roll.
Agile +1d3 Dexterity
Antennae Large antennae which sprout from a random location and grant a new primary sense; roll 1d6:
1: Echolocation (sonar), 2: Thermoperception (heat), 3: Insanoception (insanity), 4: Nociception 
(pain), 5: Electroperception (electrical energy), 6: Emotiception (a particular emotion, such as 
fear or hatred).
The primary sense has an effective range equal to the mutants Strengthx10 in metres.
Armed The mutant has an additional 1d3 limbs that terminate in a weapon-like protruberance (such as 
a scythe-like claw or a bony club). The weapon in ﬂ icts 1d6+1 damage and is used successfully 
on a Str 8+ roll. It may use any skill it has in Natural Weapons as a DM to the roll.
Armoured The mutant has a natural 1d6 points of armour protection across its whole body
Arms Gain an extra pair of limbs; roll 1d6:
1: Tentacles, 2: Spider-like legs, 3: Hooves, 4: Flightless wings, 5: Flippers or ﬁ ns, 6: Pincers.
Asymmetric One half of the mutant is larger, longer or taller than the other. Increase either Strength or 
Endurance by +1d6 but reduce Dexterity by the same amount.
Beaked The mutant has a bony, bird-like beak. It gains a bite attack for 1d6+1 damage which it can use 
successfully on a Dex 8+ roll. It may use any skill it has in Natural Weapons as a DM to the roll.
Big The mutant is especially large. It gains +1d6 Strength and Endurance but loses 1d6 Dexterity. 
Attacks against it are at a +1 DM owing to the mutant’s size.
Blind No vision organs. The mutant sees using other senses but its Dex is reduced by 1d3. It is not 
susceptible to any form of attacks that blind or impair physical vision.
Burning The mutant glows with burning heat, injuring anyone within melee range; roll 1d6 to determine 
the damage per round: 
1: 1 point, 2: 1d3, 3: 1d3+1, 4: 1d6, 5: 1d6+1, 6: 2d6.
Chameleon The mutant has a natural, chameleon-like camou ﬂ age which grants it the equivalent of Stealth 
4.
Clawed The mutant has claws instead of hands. It loses 1 point of Dex but gains 1 point of Str. The claws 
inﬂ ict 1d6+1 damage on a successful Dex 8+ roll.
Clever +1d3 Int.
Climbing Has a spider or lizard like ability to scale surfaces, gaining Athletics (co-ordination) 4 for climbing 
purposes.
Deaf The mutant has no hearing organs. It is therefore oblivious to spoken language and commands, 
and all sonic attacks.
Disturbing Creature is covered with unsettling forms, such as baby arms or multiple eyes or mouths. 
Remaining in its presence requires an End 8+ roll; if this is failed, then the mutant’s appearance 
is too disturbing to contemplate and the observer is forced to get out of its sight. If the roll is a 
success, the observer suffers a –1 DM to all skills whilst in its presence.

===PAGE 217===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
216
Droning The mutant produces a buzzing noise that sedates listeners, either verbally or through rubbing 
together its limbs or other physical components. Everyone in a 10m radius must roll End 8+. If 
unsuccessful they become relaxed and unwilling to attack or oppose the mutant for 1d6 minutes.
Feeble –1d3 Strength.
Frail –1d3 Endurance.
Head The mutant has an extra head – not necessarily human – which is imbued with the same 
intelligence as the primary head. The additional head has a personality of its own: roll 1d6:
1: Arrogant, 2: Passive, 3: Psychopathic, 4: Antagonistic, 5: Kind and compassionate, 6: 
Sarcastic but witty.
Horned The mutant is equipped with horns and gains a gore attack. The attack is successful on a 
Strength 8+ roll and inﬂ icts 2d6–1 damage.
Icy Radiates freezing coldness, injuring anyone within melee range; roll 1d6 for the degree of 
damage caused every round:
1: 1 point, 2: 1d3, 3: 1d3+1, 4: 1d6, 5: 1d6+1, 6: 2d6.
Intangible The mutant can phase itself out of existence for 1d3 Combat Rounds. Whilst Intangible it cannot 
be harmed physically and can pass through solid substances. After using this power, it cannot 
be used against for another 1d6+1 Combat Rounds.
Inverted All vital organs are external, thus all successful attacks upon it inﬂ ict twice rolled damage.
Leaper Has powerfully sprung legs, gains +1d3 Dex and Athletics (co-ordination) 4 when leaping.
Levitating Has the capability to move over any solid or liquid surface without sinking or leaving tracks. The 
mutant levitates at a maximum height, in metres, equal to its Strength and moves at 6m per 
Combat Round but has no other Psionic Powers.
Mimic Changes into the shape of a creature it successfully touches, maintaining its own characteristics 
but assuming a duplicate image of the organic creature contacted. It can maintain this shape for 
a number of Combat Rounds equal to its Endurance.
Mournful Appearance is so sad or pathetic, that observers must succeed in an Intelligence 8+ or be so 
ﬁ lled with compassion that they cannot possible harm or allow the mutant to come to harm.
Obfuscating Produces a cloud of mist that blinds observers. The cloud has a radius in metres equal to the 
mutant’s Endurance and those caught in it suffer a –3 penalty to all skills.
Observant One of the creature’s sensory organs either grows bigger (x1d6 in size) or multiplies (x1d6 in 
number), adding a +3 DM to any skill when using that sensory perception; roll 1d6: 
1: Sight, 2: Sound, 3: Smell, 4: Taste, 5: Touch, 6: Referee’s choice.
Quick The mutant gains an additional Signiﬁ cant Action every Combat round and +2 to Initiative rolls.
Regenerating The mutant heals 1d6 points of damage every Combat Round.
Roaring The mutant produces a thunderous sound which deafens listeners, who must succeed in an 
Endurance 8+ roll or be completely deafened for a number of Combat Rounds equal to the 
mutant’s Strength.
Scintillating A shifting polychromatic appearance that confuses onlookers, who must succeed in an Intelligence 
8+ roll or suffer a –3 DM to all skills when dealing with the mutant in any direct way.
Screaming Horrible screams which terrify listeners, who must succeed in an Endurance 8+ roll or ﬂ ee for 
their lives. The terror inﬂ icted by the scream lasts for 1d6 hours after the initial attack.
Skinless The mutant has no skin covering its muscles and sinews. It has no Armour Points and cannot 
wear armour. It also suffers an additional +1 damage when physically attacked.
Slimy Leaves a sticky trail wherever it travels.
Slow The mutant shambles at a maximum of 3 metres per Combat Round and suffers –1 to Initiative 
rolls.
Small The mutant gains +1d6 Dex but reduces Strength by the same amount.
Spiny The mutant is equipped with a mass of sharp spines. Opponents in melee suffer half their own 
rolled damage if they successfully land an attack.
Trait Effects

===PAGE 218===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
217
Stench Gives off nauseating odours that sicken inhalers, who must succeed in an Endurance 10+ roll 
to avoid dropping prone and vomiting. If affected, no other actions can be taken for 1d6 Combat 
Rounds until the nausea passes.
Sticky Secretes a strong glue or mucus which causes items to adhere to its skin, requiring a Str 10+ 
roll to remove.
Sting The mutant has some form of stinger. It causes damage on a successful Dex 8+ attack. Roll 1d6 
to determine the damage the sting causes:
1: 1 point, 2: 1d3, 3: 1d3+1, 4: 1d6, 5: 1d6+1, 6: 2d6.
Strong +1d6 Str.
Stupid –1d6 Int.
Swimmer Has webbed digits and gills. The mutant can swim at 8m per Combat Round and can breathe 
under water for a number of minutes equal to its Str+End.
Tongue The mutant has a long, toad-like tongue which can be used to strike, for 1d3 damage, at targets 
up to a number of metres equal to the mutant’s Dex. To strike a speci ﬁ c location or area, the 
mutant must succeed in a Dex 8+ roll.
Tough +1d6 End.
Warped One random location changes to that of a different species; roll 1d6 for the location affected and 
1d6 for the species it changes to:
1: Head, 2: Upper Body, 3: Lower Body, 4: Arms, 5: Legs, 6: Referee’s choice.
1: Cat, 2: Dog, 3: Bull, 4: Goat, 5: Pig, 6: Referee’s choice.
Wings Gains bat, bird, butter ﬂ y or insect wings granting a Flying Movement equal to normal 
Movement.
Trait Effects

===PAGE 219===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
218
 Perps
Everyone in Mega-City One is a potential perp. Innocuous 
activities can be crimes and the ever-vigilant Judges are 
always on the look-out for citizens who commit crime, 
however small, or are just about to. Ignorance of the law is 
no defence; blatantly ﬂ outing it earns time in the cubes.
Every Judge on a routine patrol encounters many perps in a 
single watch. The system here is designed to provide some 
random, on-the-spot perps and crimes for Judges to deal 
with in the course of their duties.
Determine the Nature of the 
Perp
Roll 2d6 to discover the perp’s nature:
2d6 Perp
2 Juve
3 Normal Citizen
4 Old Age Citizen
5 Mutie
6 Member of an Organised Crime Gang
7 Petty Crime Addict
8 Normal Citizen
9 Juve
10 Member of an Organised Crime Gang
11 Petty Crime Addict
12 Alien
Determine the Crime
Roll d66 to determine what crime the perp is committing.
d66 Crime
12 Premeditated mass murder (spree or serial 
killing)
13 Premeditated murder
14 Sexual Assault
15 Assault of a Judge 
16 Assault of a citizen 
21 Assault of a Judge with a deadly weapon
22 Assault of a citizen with a deadly weapon
23 Common assault or brawling
24 Armed robbery with violence
25 Armed robbery
26 Hijacking
31 Mopad Piracy
32 Looting
33 Tapping
34 Wrecking
35 Burglary
36 Breaking and Entering
41 Possessing equipment to be used for burglary
42 Trespass
43 Shoplifting
44 Dunking (pick-pocketing)
45 Theft 
46 Dealing in stolen goods/ Possession of stolen 
property
51 Block War participation
52 Rioting
53 Obstruction
54 Unlawful assembly
55 Drunk and disorderly
56 Driving under the in ﬂ uence of drink or drugs
61 Dangerous driving
62 Driving while banned/without a permit
63 Speeding, slow driving, lane weaving, light 
jumping
64 Driving an un-roadworthy or dangerous vehicle
65 Parking violation
66 Jimping
Is the Creep Armed?
Roll 2d6 to see if he is and if so, how…
2d6 Armaments
2 Yes – Club or other, simple melee weapon
3 Yes – knife or other blade
4 Yes – sword, axe or power tool
5 Yes – a piece of industrial equipment
6 None
7 None
8 None
9 Yes – Handgun (ballistic)
10 Yes – Handgun (energy)
11 Yes – Riﬂ  e (ballistic)
12 Yes – Riﬂ  e (energy)
And how competent is the perp with that weapon? Roll 1d6–
3 to determine the skill level in the weapon he has. If the 
result is negative, then the perp is unskilled and suffers a –3 
DM when trying to use the weapon.
Determine the Creep’s Attitude
How is the perp going to react to the Judge’s intervention? Roll 2d6 
to determine the perp’s Desperation (see the I Am The Law 
chapter, page 76). If the perp is armed, apply a +2 DM to the roll.
d66 Crime

===PAGE 220===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
219
2d6 Desperation Level
2+ 6
3+ 4
4+ 1
5-6 0
7– 1
8– 2
9– 3
10 –4
11 –5
12+ –6
How Many Citizens Are Causing 
an Obstruction?
Roll 4d6–4 (generating a number between 0 and 20) to 
determine how many additional citizens are in the vicinity 
of the perp, who could become obstructions, targets or 
hostages. As an option, roll 2d6 to see how they react once 
the Judge intervenes…
2d6 Reaction
2 Aid the perp somehow – Judges are really 
hated in this part of the sector.
3 Harass the Judge – this is sheer victimisation!
4 General obstruction – citizens panic and charge 
around, regardless of the crime underway.
5 General obstruction – not their fault; they do not 
want to be there.
6 Get out of the way and remain uninvolved.
7 Get out of the way and remain uninvolved.
8 Get out of the way and remain uninvolved.
9 Get out of the way and remain uninvolved.
10 Panic – citizen or citizens run into the potential 
line of ﬁ re.
11 Victim Material – citizens place themselves in a 
situation the perp can use (hostage, for instance).
12 Citizens aid the Judge – but risk taking the law 
into their own hands.
Assorted 
Adversaries
This section provides game statistics for the kinds of aliens, 
crazies, mutants and creeps the previous sections have 
reviewed. It includes creatures such as the dinosaurs of 
the Cursed Earth, aliens such as the feared Kleggs and 
other strangeness to challenge and perplex Judges in your 
campaigns.
 Apes
The scientists of the 21 st Century performed many genetic-
enhancing experiments upon animals with the aim of 
increasing their intelligence. Though these experiments are 
now illegal, intelligent apes can be found in great numbers 
in an area of Mega-City One known as the Jungle. Although 
most apes are content to keep to themselves and their own 
community, all too many have turned to crime as a means of 
rising above both fellow ape and human. The most famous 
of these was Don Uggie Apelino who, with the help of Fast 
Eeek and Joe Bananas, ran a number of mobster rackets 
until ﬁ nally sentenced to imprisonment within the Mega-
City Zoo by Judge Dredd. Many ape criminal gangs still 
persist today, operating out of the Jungle, though none have 
managed to achieve the notoriety of Don Apelino. Another 
ape fast gaining a reputation for himself is the simian 
bodyguard of private investigator Galen DeMarco, a gorilla 
known as Travis Perkins.
Typical Statistics: Str 2d6+2, Dex 2d6+3, End 2d6, Int 
2d6, Edu 2d6–2, Soc 2d6–2
Average Chimp: Str 9 (+1), Dex 10 (+1), End 7 (+0), Int 
7 (+0), Edu 5 (–1), Soc 5 (–1)


===PAGE 221===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
220
Skills: Athletics (co-ordination) 4, Athletics (strength) 3, 
Melee (unarmed combat) 1, Steward 1, Tactics 1.
Traits: Apes can detect enemies by their scent alone. 
They automatically detect all enemies within 10 metres by 
their scent, increasing to a 20 metres if they are downwind 
or decreasing to 5 metres if they are upwind.
Typical Weapons:  Clubs, antique ballistic weapons 
(gangsters only).
Armour: None.
Gorilla: Str 2d6+4, Dex 2d6+2, End 2d6+2, Int 2d6–1, Edu 
2d6–2, Soc 2d6–2
Average Gorilla: Str 11 (+1), Dex 9 (+1), End 9 (+1), Int 
6 (+0), Edu 5 (–1), Soc 5 (–1)
Skills: Athletics (co-ordination) 2, Athletics (strength) 4, 
Gun Combat (slug pistol) 1, Melee (unarmed combat) 3
Traits: Apes can detect enemies by their scent alone. 
They automatically detect all enemies within 10 metres by 
their scent, increasing to a 20 metres if they are downwind 
or decreasing to 5 metres if they are upwind.
Typical Weapons:  Clubs, antique ballistic weapons 
(gangsters only).
Armour: None.
 Dog Vultures (Cursed Earth 
Mutant Animals)
There are many species of mutated vermin to be found in the 
barren wastes of the Cursed Earth though packs have been 
known to ﬂ y across the walls of Mega-City One undetected, 
causing terror amongst the citizens until the Judges 
are called in to deal with the menace. One of the most 
common are dog vultures, mutant pack hunters that plague 
the unwary daring to travel across the irradiated desert. 
Capable ﬂ yers, dog vultures can stay aloft for hours, circling 
the landscape to prey on the weak and helpless. However, 
they are scavengers by nature and a strong display of force 
can easily cause them to ﬂ ee in panic. Dog vultures never 
attack targets that outnumber themselves and heavy losses 
amongst their pack will invariably cause them to take to the 
air with all possible speed. If a lone victim is sighted by the 
pack, they attack in force and attempt to overwhelm their 
target through sheer weight of numbers. 
Typical Statistics: Str 2d6+2; Dex 3d6–1; End 2d6; Int 
2d6
Average Dog Vulture: Str 9 (+1), Dex 10 (+1), End 7 
(+0), Int 7 (+0), Edu –, Soc –
Skills: Flyer 3, Melee (Natural Weapons) 1.
Traits: Dog Bite (Natural Weapon), Flight (vulture wings) 
6m per round.
Typical Weapons:  Bite (Melee Natural Weapon) 
1d6+2.
Armour: 1 point for thick fur.
 Gila-Munja
The Gila-Munja are a tribe of mutated assassins who live 
only to carry out their deadly deeds and will not rest until 
their contract is ful ﬁ lled. As assassins, the Gila-Munja are 
amongst the deadliest on Earth and are ideally suited to this 
task. Their thick hides are capable of changing colour almost 
instantly to match their surroundings ﬂ awlessly, often giving 
the impression that these creatures can turn invisible at will. 
Well adapted to life in the Cursed Earth, the Gila-Munja are 
feared throughout the wasteland but many often attempt 
to inﬁ ltrate Mega-City One to ful ﬁ l assassination contracts 
made with the lowest scum of the city. A criminal bent on 
hiring the Gila-Munja to end the life of an enemy must meet 
them in their homelands north of Texas City and launch a 
ﬂ are to announce his presence. The Gila-Munja listen to the 
contract being offered and the price should they, inevitably, 
succeed. Poor offers have been known to result in the Gila-
Munja killing their prospective employer. If they do decide to 
accept the contract, the Gila-Munja seal the deal by slaying 
one of their own number in a sacred ritual and pledging not 
to rest until the assassination has been completed. 
Small and squat, the Gila-Munja grow to be the height of 
a small man but underneath the grey oily skin is a mass 
of muscle ﬁ bre and tissue that belies their stature. Powerful 
legs allow the Gila-Munja to scale most vertical surfaces 
with ease and their razor-sharp claws are capable of slicing 
open even the thickest armour. Coated with an utterly lethal 
contact poison, these crab-like claws are the Gila-Munja’s 
primary weapon, remaining potent for several days after the 
creature is dead. 
Typical Statistics: Str 3d6–2, Dex 3d6+1, End 2d6, Int 
2d6, Edu 1d6–1, Soc 1d6–1
Average Gila Munja: Str 9 (+1), Dex 12 (+2), End 7 
(+0), Int 7 (+0), Edu 2 (–2), Soc 2 (–2)
Skills: Broker 2, Melee (Natural Weapons) 3, Stealth 4.

===PAGE 222===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
221
Typical Statistics: Str 3d6+4, Dex 2d6+1, End 2d6+5, 
Int 2d6–1, Edu 2d6–1, Soc 1d6–2
Average Klegg Mercenary:  Str 15 (+3), Dex 8 (+0), 
End 12 (+2), Int 6 (+0), Edu 6 (+0), Soc 2 (–2)
Skills: Broker 1, Computers 1, Gun Combat (slug ri ﬂ e) 3, 
Melee (natural weapons) 2, Survival 2.
Typical Weapons: Klegg Assault Cannon (see below), 
Bite 2d6+1, Fists 1d6+3.
Armour: 8 points for scaled skin and combat blast 
armour.
 Klegghound
The klegghounds are never far from their alien masters and 
are used to track, round up and slay any prey the kleggs 
themselves are unable to capture. Muscular in build, these 
huge, reptilian dog-like creatures are renowned for their ability 
to track prey, not by smell but by taste alone. By consuming 
a possession of a victim or simply licking the road where tyre 
tracks have been left, klegghounds can relentlessly pursue 
their prey for many hours with a high degree of accuracy. 
Kleggs and their hounds tend to form tight bonds whereby 
the creature will follow its master’s wishes almost intuitively 
though their animal intelligence makes them rather easier 
to fool when the kleggs are not around. Klegghounds prefer 
to attack in great numbers, where their powerful build and 
superior close combat abilities will bring down almost any 
enemy. They are skilled at acting in concert with the kleggs 
themselves and are often used in frontal assaults of enemy-
held positions whilst the kleggs lay down awesome amounts 
of ﬁ repower.
Traits: Chameleon, Pincers.
Typical Weapons: Pincers, 2d6+3, plus contact poison 
(additional 3d6 damage).
Armour: 1 point for oily skin and sinew.
 Kleggs
The kleggs are a race of alien mercenaries, made famous 
on Earth during the reign of the insane Chief Judge Caligula 
when they were used to pacify the citizens of Mega-City One 
in 2101. Kleggs resemble 4 metre high, bipedal crocodiles and 
are utterly savage, taking payment not in credits or groats but 
only in fresh meat. Their favourite contracts are generally those 
that involve being hired to annihilate sub-species of creatures 
on distant worlds, being permitted to eat the sub-species as 
payment. Incredibly strong and carrying a lethal array of heavy 
weapons, kleggs are all but unstoppable in battle and the 
combination of their thick hides and blast armour make them 
practically impervious to small arms ﬁ re. After a signi ﬁ cant 
number were annihilated by Judge Dredd, most kleggs have 
vowed never to return to Mega-City One but some still dwell in 
ruined sectors and the Cursed Earth, having been left behind 
nearly twenty years before and others will dare to set foot in 
the city if the payment is high enough. 
Kleggs rarely engage in convoluted tactics and stratagems, 
as their brute strength and weapons ensure virtually no other 
race can withstand them in combat. Their loud, rasping 
voices announce the arrival of the kleggs and bring terror 
to their victims, something the aliens use in order to sow 
confusion amongst an enemy. A popular war cry is ‘Klegg-
Haiiii!’ though they are also given to longer and altogether 
more poetic chants such as ‘Meaty beaty, chop ‘em neatly, 
death or glory, no retreatee!’
Klegg Assault Cannon
The assault cannon used by the kleggs is an extremely large weapon, having more in common with a street cannon 
than any other riﬂ e. It is far too large and heavy for a human to use but perps able to procure one of these incredibly large 
weapons have been known to mount them on vehicles. 
Weapon Range Damage Auto Recoil
Mass 
(kg) Magazine Cost (Cr.)
Ammo 
Cost (Cr.)
Klegg Assault 
Cannon
Ranged 
(riﬂ e)
4d6+6 Yes 3 25 30 — 15

===PAGE 223===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
222
Typical Statistics: Str 3d6+2, Dex 2d6+3, End 2d6+4, 
Int 1d6–2, Edu –, Soc –
Average Klegghound: Str 13 (+2), Dex 10 (+1), End 
11 (+2), Int 2 (–2), Edu –, Soc –
Skills: Athletics (strength) 4, Melee (natural weapons) 3, 
Stealth 2, Survival 4.
Traits: Incredible sense of taste. Klegghounds can track 
enemies by taste alone. By tasting an item touched by an 
enemy, the hounds are able to track him for up to 100km as 
longs as they continue to make a Survival+Dex 8+ roll every 
10 kilometres.
Typical Weapons: Bite 2d6+2, Claws 2d6–1.
Armour: 8 points for scaled skin.
 Mutants
The mutants here are created using the Mutation rules 
beginning on page 213 of this chapter. They serve as 
examples of the kind of mutants found in the Cursed Earth 
although there are, (un)naturally, countless variations.
Necky the Prospector 
– Radical Mutation (Human 
Mutant)
This mutant’s neck is attached to the poor wretch’s chest 
rather than his shoulders and his feet are an outlandish 
approximation of bird’s feet – scaled and taloned. The 
mutant has no Mutational Traits and perhaps keeps his 
sunny disposition because of it. He works in the rad-tar pits 
bringing-up old treasures from the pre-war days, which he 
cleans off and offers for sale at his pathetic shack up on 
the hill. His most prize possession is his working stump gun, 
which he has used to see-off marauders quite a few times 
now. Their skulls line the stockade around his tar pit, as a 
warning.
Str 12 (+2), Dex 12 (+2), End 7 (+0), Int 6 (+0), Edu 3 (–1), 
Soc 3 (–1)
Skills: Athletics (co-ordination) 3, Gun Combat 0, Science 
(prospectin’ rad-tar pit) 2.
Traits: None.
Typical Weapons: Stump gun and 10 shells.
Armour: None.
Dumbo Raddox – Severe 
Mutation (Human Mutant)
This mutant’s hands are where his ears should be and his 
ears are on the ends of his arms. His head is distended, 
crushing his features together into a long line but boy is 
that brain of his big! They call him Dumbo because of the 
hands and ears, not because he is dumb in any way but 
he lets people think he is before blinding them with astute 
observations and lines of poetry he has memorised from old 
books. And as he talks, lights dance around head, soothing 
and calming even the rowdiest of folks.
Str 5 (–1), Dex 1 (–2), End 5 (–1), Int 13 (+2), Edu 9 (+1), 
Soc 8 (+0)
Skills: Advocate 2, Life Sciences (biology) 2.
Traits: Mournful, Scintillating (lights generated by that big 
old brain).
Typical Weapons: None.
Armour: None.
Alien Finder General – Severe 
Mutation (Human Mutant)
The Alien Finder General of the Cursed Earth is the goat-
headed, self-appointed persecutor of aliens who dare to land 
on Earth and pollute the sanctity of his lands. Accompanied 
by his mutated posse and riding mutated horses, the Alien 
Finder General scours the radlands in search of aliens (or 
mutants who look like aliens) which are rounded-up and sold 
at the slave auctions that travel through the shanty towns, 
selling captured aliens into servitude and drudgery. Any 
alien who resists is put to the death – and many that do not 
are slaughtered simply to make an example.
Str 10 (+1), Dex 11 (+1), End 15 (+3), Int 10 (+1), Edu 9 (+1), 
Soc 10 (+1)
Skills: Animals (riding) 2, Animals (training) 2, Deception 
1, Gun Combat (slug pistol) 2, Melee (blade) 3, Melee 
(unarmed combat) 2, Stealth 2.
Traits: Warped (goat head), Tough.
Typical Weapons: Broadsword (4d6), Spitgun.
Armour: 3 point Cloth padding.
 Rad Rat
The mutant rats of 2124 are a terror to behold, for they can 
grow to huge sizes and bring down a fully grown human with 

===PAGE 224===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
223
ease when attacking in numbers. Believed to have mutated 
deep within the Cursed Earth after the Atomic War, mutant 
rats have become a plague both in the wasteland and within 
the darker regions of Mega-City One, where they scavenge 
and prey upon the weak. Their bite carries a dreadful poison 
that has mutated in potency along with the rats themselves. 
The typical mutant rat will grow to around two feet long, 
though specimens over twice this size have been reported in 
ruined sectors and Mega-City One’s sewer system. Mutant 
rats always attack in packs, in ﬂ icting dozens of poisonous 
wounds on their victims in a matter of seconds. Alone, they 
tend towards cowardice, though one should never be backed 
into a corner it cannot retreat from as this will likely result in 
instant attack. 
Typical Statistics: Str 2d6–2, Dex 3d6+1, End 2d6, Int 
1d6–2, Edu –, Soc –
Average Rad Rat: Str 5 (–1), Dex 12 (+2), End 7 (+0), 
Int 2 (–2), Edu –, Soc –
Skills: Athletics (co-ordination) 4, Melee (natural weapons) 
1, Survival 5.
Traits: Poisonous.
Typical Weapons:  Bite 1d3–1, plus the incisors of 
mutant rats contain a terrible poison that can cause severe 
pain and even death. Mutant rat poison requires any victim 
bitten and injured, to roll End 11+. If he succeeds, he takes 
a further 1d6 damage from the poison’s ability to induce 
nausea. If he fails, he suffers 1d6 damage every hour 
until Rad Rat vaccine (found in most medipacks) can be 
administered.
Armour: None.
 Sewer-Gators
The antiquated sewers and Undercity of Mega-City One 
are the home of ﬁ ve-metre long alligators who feed on 
rats and any citizen who gets in their way, such as sewer 
maintenance men or the ill-fated Jimmy Tarbuck Block 
Survival Club. The sewer-gators are white and blind but 
their incredible senses of hearing and smell can detect 
the scent of fresh ﬂ esh over a great distance. The sewers 
are deep enough that gators can swim silently up on 
their victims undetected and then rush them, jaws open, 
decapitating their food in one bone-splintering crunch. 
Though maintenance droids have been reprogrammed to 
hunt down and kill the ‘gators, a few smaller specimens 
have slowly found their way to sewer outlets leading into 
the city’s extensive man-made canal system. 
Typical Statistics: Str 3d6+4, Dex 2d6+3, End 3d6+2, 
Int 1d6–3, Edu –, Soc –
Average Sewer-Gator: Str 15 (+3), Dex 10 (+1), End 
13 (+2), Int 1 (–2), Edu –, Soc –
Skills: Athletics (strength) 4, Melee (natural weapons) 2, 
Survival 2.
Traits: Blind.
Typical Weapons: Bite 2d6+6, Tail-Lash 2d6–1.
Armour: 4 points for thick, scaled, albino hide.
 Troggies
The term ‘troggies’ originally referred to a secretive cult living 
deep beneath Mega-City One, intent on destroying the world 
above them. After the cult met its end at the hands of Judge 
Dredd, ‘troggies’ has come to refer to all the sub-humans 
living in the Undercity. Believed to have evolved from original 
inhabitants trapped in the old cities when Mega-City One was 
built on top of them, troggies have become adapted to their 
lightless environment. All but losing the ability to see, they 
can nonetheless sense their surroundings through a highly 
developed sense of smell and while physically weak, their 
large numbers can pose a threat to anyone daring to venture 
into the Undercity. Troggies attack any sentient beings they 
outnumber – although they stay clear of the Undercity’s 
more powerful denizens, such as sewer-gators.
Typical Statistics: Str 2d6, Dex 2d6+1, End 2d6, Int 
2d6–2, Edu 1d6–1, Soc –
Average Troggy: Str 7 (+0), Dex 8 (+0), End 7 (+0), Int 
5 (–1), Edu 3 (–1), Soc –
Skills: Melee (bludgeon) 1, Survival 2, Tactics 1.
Traits: Blind, Light Sensitive (any bursts or ﬂ ashes of light 
cause intense pain, rendering troggies helpless for 1d3 
Combat Rounds).
Typical Weapons: Club.
Armour: None.
 Tweaks
Peaceful, bear-like aliens, Tweaks are rock and ore 
digesters with an advanced but secretive clan society that 
prefers to keep itself isolated from outsiders. The Tweak 
home world is exceedingly rich is precious ores, metals 
and gems which, naturally, is a great attraction to other 

===PAGE 225===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
224
avaricious species (humans ﬁ rst and foremost). Members 
of the tweak race have been captured and brought to Earth 
by slavers, including the tweak king, although this was 
a ruse designed to lull the slavers into believing that the 
species is docile with nothing to offer further explorers and 
exploiters. The king – known as Tweak – was rescued by 
Dredd and Spikes Harvey Rotten during their time in the 
Cursed Earth, en-route to Mega-City Two. Tweak revealed 
his psionic abilities and the secret of his homeworld – which 
Dredd has maintained as part of the debt of honour owed 
to this noble race. Tweak was returned to his home world 
but his wife and child were brutally murdered by Cursed 
Earth slavers.
Tweaks are naturally psionic, possessing the talents 
of Telepathy and Clairvoyance. They resemble a cross 
between bears and anteaters, with large, emotive eyes, long 
snouts and thin, strong, questing tongues. Their jaws are 
strong enough to crack and crumble rocks and their massive 
claws capable of surrounding large boulders in a single span. 
Although peaceful, they can be provoked to great wrath and 
become fearsome combatants.
Typical Statistics: Str 3d6+3, Dex 2d6+3, End 2d6+2, 
Int 2d6+2, Edu 2d6, Soc 2d6, Psi 2d6+1
Average Tweak: Str 14 (+2), Dex 10 (+1), End 9 (+1), Int 
9 (+1), Edu 7 (+0), Soc 7 (+0), Psi 8 (+1)
Skills: Athletics (strength) 3, Leadership 1, Melee (natural 
weapons) 1, Physical Sciences (physics) 2, Survival 1.
Traits: Psionic – Telepathy 1 and Clairvoyance 1, Mineral 
Digesters.
Typical Weapons: Claws 3d6+1, thrown rock 3d6.
Armour: 2 points of fur and sinew.
Most Wanted 
Perps
The perps here are all famous Judge Dredd villains. Most – if 
not all – have been killed or arrested by Dredd himself but 
that has never been a barrier to such characters returning 
to Mega-City One’s streets. Judge Death, despite constant 
efforts to kill or contain him, always seems to break free. 
Mean Machine Angel is a regular; though who is to say 
someone would not clone the rest of the family? Perhaps a 
version of Orlok, from a parallel dimension where East-Meg 
Pa Angel
Intensely proud of his murderous 
progeny, Pa Angel has committed every 
crime under the sun and revelled in it. He 
has passed on his expertise to his sons 
and, whilst he loves all his boys, he has 
a special place in his heart for Junior, 
whose vicious ways remind him of his 
own youth. It is a tender thing, the love 
between father and son and wonderful 
when an old man can pass along a 
useful trade like torturin’ and killin’.
Str 7 (+0), Dex 9 (+1), End 8 (+0), Int 10 
(+1), Edu 7 (+0), Soc 1 (–2)
Skills: Computers 1, Deception 3, 
Drive (wheeled) 2, Gambling 3, Gun 
Combat (slug riﬂ e) 2, Gun Combat (slug 
pistol) 2, Jack of All Trades 1, Pilot (small 
craft) 1, Stealth 2, Survival 2.
Weapons: Spitgun.
Armour: None.
Link Angel
Thick set, taciturn and brutal, Link 
resembles a gorilla and behaves much 
like one (although that insults all decent, 
law-abiding gorillas). Link drifts through 
the world seemingly oblivious to it until 
it comes to killing and then he suddenly 
develops an interest.
One was victorious, comes to Mega-City One to hatch the 
Block Mania plot all over again.
These perps are tough though – and if used, should be used 
sparingly!
 Angel Gang
Hailing from the radlands just north of Texas City, the Angels 
are a bunch of sociopaths who revel in pain and bloodshed 
for its own sake. Led by the scheming, extremely proud, Pa, 
the Angels kidnapped Owen Krysler, the Judge Child and 
ﬂ ed across the galaxy in a bid to make as much money as 
possible from their acquisition. Confronted and outwitted 
on Xanadu by Dredd, the Angels met their respective ends 
although Mean Machine survived and has been a thorn in 
Mega-City One’s side ever since.

===PAGE 226===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
225
Str 10 (+1), Dex 6 (+0), End 10 (+1), Int 5 (–1), Edu 3 (–1), 
Soc 1 (–2)
Skills: Deception 1, Drive (wheeled) 1, Gun Combat (slug 
pistol) 2, Melee (bludgeon) 3, Stealth 1, Survival 1.
Weapons: Club, Spitgun.
Armour: None.
Junior Angel
Youngest of the gang and the apple of his doting father’s eye, 
Junior is as spoiled a brat as they come, always demanding to 
be the centre of attention. Utterly sadistic and psychopathic, 
Junior revels in torture and is especially inventive when it 
comes to inﬂ icting pain on people – especially the innocent. 
He carries with him his prized Torturin’ Kit (once his Pa’s) 
which includes thumbscrews, pliers, branding irons, elctro-
prods, scalpels, ﬂ ensing blades and a bag of cooking salt. 
There is probably nothing nastier on two human legs.
Str 7 (+0), Dex 9 (+1), End 7 (+0), Int 7 (+0), Edu 8 (+1), 
Soc 1 (–2)
Skills: Deception 1, Drive (wheeled) 1, Gambling 1, Gun 
Combat (slug pistol) 2, Interrogation 3, Melee (unarmed 
combat) 1, Stealth 1, Survival 1.
Weapons: Spitgun.
Armour: None.

===PAGE 227===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
226
Mean Machine Angel
Mean was the runt of the bunch: docile and peaceful whilst the 
others were cruel and rotten, Pa decided to cut the niceness 
out of Mean altogether and so took the gawky, ﬂ ower-loving 
boy to see a cyber ripper-doc in Texas City who, with a gun 
to his head, carried out the substantial corrective surgery 
that created the Mean Machine.
Mean has had large parts of his brain – those containing 
all passive/control functions – removed or altered. Mean is 
now permanently surly but his moods are controlled by a dial 
on his forehead which, with a ﬂ ick, goes from surly, through 
mean, then to vicious and, on 4, brutal. And Mean’s temper 
alters accordingly. To ice the cake, Mean’s right arm was 
removed and replaced with a cybernetic claw, lending him 
greater strength and an inbuilt weapon.
Even though his family has been killed, Mean has endured, 
having been resurrected once and been both an escapee and 
the test subject for a Justice Department mind control drug.
Str 11 (+2), Dex 7 (+1), End 12 (+2), Int 4 (–1), Edu 2 (–2), 
Soc 1 (–2)
Skills: Deception 1, Drive (wheeled) 1, Melee (unarmed 
combat) 3, Survival 4.
Traits: Cybernetic arm (+2 Str); Cybernetic 4-Point Brutality 
Meter. Mean’s characteristics and skills when set on 1 
(Surly) are as above. Each subsequent setting increases the 
following by a further 1: Str, End, Melee (unarmed combat). 
Thus, on 4 – Brutal, Mean has Str 14, End 15 and Melee 6.
Weapons: Cybernetic Arm 3d6+1. Head-butt 4d6, +1 for 
each setting on his dial (so 4d6+4 on Brutal).
Armour: 4 points for cybernetic enhancements and 
general meanness
Fink Angel
The forgotten Angel, Fink went off the live in a hole in the 
ground at a young age and never looked back. He scurried 
through the Cursed Earth, alone, for years, poisoning watering 
holes and robbing the unfortunates who drank from the mired 
waters. Fink is a master poisoner, with a vast array of slow 
acting, fast acting, paralysing and other poisonous concoctions 
in his arsenal. The Cursed Earth has taken its toll and Fink is a 
cadaverous, twisted creature with a hatred for all life. His only 
friend is Ratty, his loyal rad rat; everyone else is mere prey.
Discovering the demise of his Pa and brothers, Fink went to 
Mega-City One to exact revenge on Dredd and the crew of 
Justice One. Judge Larter fell to Fink’s poisons and Judge 
Hershey nearly succumbed as Fink fed her, alive, into a 
Resyk plant.
Str 8 (+0), Dex 10 (+1), End 9 (+0), Int 8 (+0), Edu 1 (+1), 
Soc 0 (–3)
Skills: Athletics (co-ordination) 4, Melee (unarmed combat) 
2, Stealth 4, Survival 4.
Traits: Corpse-like, Fink has the Disturbing mutant trait.
Weapons: Sling and Caltrops. Fink uses his Athletics skill 
for ranged combat. Poisons (see below). 
Fast Actin’ Poison:  This causes an immediate 6d6 
damage when it encounters exposed ﬂ esh.
Delayed Actin’ Poison: This poison takes its time, 
inﬂ icting 1d6+2 damage each minute over the course of 
1d6x10 minutes. The sufferer can make an Endurance 8+ 
throw every minute to mitigate that minute’s damage.
Paralysin’ Poison: This poison cause no damage but 
the target must make an Endurance 10+ roll or be completely 
paralysed for 1d6 hours.
Fink coats his spiked caltrops with his poisons or can 
administer them directly to a water supply.
Armour: None.
 Chopper
Just another bored, disaffected juve, Marlon Shakespeare 
sought some outlet from block-life tedium and became a 
scrawler, engaging in ever more inventive and daring grafﬁ ti 
in a bid to make his name. Caught after competing against 
the robot Phantom in the uber-scrawl over the Statue of 
Justice, Chopper, as he was now known, served his time in 
the juve cubes where, as part of standard rehab, he learned 
to powerboard.
On release, Chopper became the Midnight Surfer, gearing-up 
up for Supersurf 7 in a serious of highly dangerous and illegal 
powerboard runs over Mega-City One’s various Supersurf 
trial routes – including shooting the treacherous Fox Tunnel 
– a route even seasoned truckers are apprehensive to make. 
Chopper won Supersurf 7 and gained the public imagination; 
so much so that when, three years later, Supersurf 10 was 
announced for Oz, Chopper had to escape and take part 
– which he did.

===PAGE 228===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
227
He did not win that contest but his bravery and sportsmanship 
earned him the admiration of the world (if not Judge Dredd). 
Chopper earned his freedom in Oz and a reputation as the 
greatest powerboarder in the world.
Str 8 (+0), Dex 12 (+1), End 9 (+0), Int 9 (+1), Edu 7 (+0), 
Soc 9 (+2)
Skills: Athletics (co-ordination) 2, Deception 2, Flyer 
(personal) 4, Melee (unarmed combat) 1, Stealth 2, Survival 
2.
Weapons: None.
Armour: None.
 Dark Judges
Sinister supernatural Judges from an alternative, doomed 
dimension where life itself is a crime, the Dark Judges – 
Death, Fire, Fear and Mortis – have vowed to bring the same 
law and justice to Mega-City One and they have attacked it 
several times over the decades (most successfully as part of 
the creation of Necropolis).
The Dark Judges cannot be killed as they do not truly live; 
once they were mortal but the Sisters of Death – Phobia and 
Nausea – made them into their current forms. Ectoplasmic 
entities with strong psionic powers, the Dark Judges have the 
ability to become Intangible (as per the mutant trait) although 
they can manifest physical forms or take possession of 
another’s body. Judge Anderson used this to her advantage 
to imprison Death when he ﬁ rst assaulted Mega-City One, 
containing him in her mind and then encasing him in Boing®.
Judge Death
Wearing a parody of Dredd’s uniform, with bone-emblazoned 
armour pads and a portcullis helmet, Death is foremost of 
the Dark Judges. His favoured method of attack is to reach 
into a person’s body and squeeze the heart until its bursts. 
When in a physical form he is impervious to any form of 
damage save ﬁ re, which causes twice its normal damage 
but his essence is always able to ﬂ ee and go in search 
of another host. To take possession, the victim must roll 
Endurance 8+ and note the Effect. The Effect needs to beat 
Death’s Possession level of 6 or Death automatically takes 
control of the body, imprisoning the mind of its owner and 
commanding it fully.
Str 12 (+2), Dex 13 (+2), End 15 (+3), Int 11 (+2), Edu 11 
(+2), Inf 10 (+2), Psi 12 (+2)
Skills: Advocate 4, Deception 6, Law 6, Melee (natural 
weapons) 6, Science (Transplanar) 3.
Traits: Intangible, Mournful, Regenerating, Stench.
Talents: Telepathy 3, Clairvoyance 3, Dimensional 
Manipulation 3.
Weapons: Heart Grasp. The attack reaches through all 
physical resistance and delivers 10d6 directly to the victim’s 
heart. Death can only perform this attack when in his own, 
tangible form.
Judge Fire
A burning skeletal form in a Judge’s uniform and carrying 
a ﬂ aming trident, Judge Fire brings the cleansing ﬂ ame of 
death to all. Like Death, Fire occupies a physical form but, 
unlike Death, cannot be harmed by ﬁ re. In delivering justice, 
Fire uses his ﬂ aming trident to immolate his enemies.
Str 11 (+2), Dex 11 (+2), End 14 (+3), Int 10 (+1), Edu 10 
(+1), Inf 10 (+2), Psi 10 (+1)
Skills: Advocate 3, Deception 4, Law 5, Melee (Trident) 6, 
Science (Transplanar) 3.
Traits: Burning (2d6), Regenerating.
Talents: Telepathy 2, Telekinesis 2.
Weapons: Flaming Trident, 8d6, plus ignites all ﬂ ammable 
items which burn for a further 2d6 damage every round until 
extinguished.

===PAGE 229===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
228
Judge Fear
Judge Fear is an imposing ﬁ gure with a black, iron helmet 
resembling a gate obscuring his face. It is just as well since 
his primary attack is to open his faceplate before his victims, 
showing them the Face of Fear and frightening them to 
death. Fear carries an assortment of bear traps dangling 
from his belt and throws them at his enemies in order to 
immobilise them. Like his cousins, Death and Fire, Fear 
regenerates from physical attacks and, like Death, can only 
be harmed by ﬁ re.
Str 11 (+2), Dex 11 (+2), End 14 (+3), Int 10 (+1), Edu 10 
(+1), Inf 10 (+2), Psi 10 (+1)
Skills: Advocate 3, Deception 4, Law 5, Melee (Thrown 
Bear Traps) 6, Science (Transplanar) 3.
Traits: Regenerating, Terrifying. Gazing into Fear’s face 
requires the target to succeed in an End 10+ roll or be 
scared to death. If the roll succeeds, the target is immune 
to what lurks behind Fear’s mask on this occasion – but on 
subsequent occasions the target must roll again – although 
he gains a +1 DM to the roll.
Talents: Telepathy 2, Telekinesis 2.
Weapons: Bear Traps, 5d6+4.
Judge Mortis
Judge Mortis is in a perpetual state of disintegration. His 
touch brings swift decay and he is sometimes employed by 
Judge Death to prepare the Dark Judges’ host bodies. His 
head is a sheep skull and he has a bony tail protruding from 
the back of his uniform. His favoured phrase is “You cannot 
resssissst ussssss!”, which is usually directed at any Psi 
Judges in the vicinity.
Str 11 (+2), Dex 11 (+2), End 14 (+3), Int 10 (+1), Edu 10 
(+1), Inf 10 (+2), Psi 10 (+1)
Skills: Advocate 3, Deception 4, Law 5, Melee (Deathly 
Touch) 6, Science (Transplanar) 3.
Traits: Disturbing, Intangible, Regenerating.
Talents: Telepathy 2, Telekinesis 2, Dimensional 
Manipulation 2.
Weapons: Deathly Touch. Any organic tissue touched by 
Judge Mortis rots instantly, causing 5d6 damage. The tissue 
cannot be healed or repaired in any way.
 Judge Cal
In the course of 100 days, the insane Chief Judge Cal, 
a despotic usurper of the Chief Judge position, managed 
to reduce the entire city to absolute terror. His mad 
proclamations, which included elevating his pet gold ﬁ sh 
to the status of Deputy Chief Judge and sentencing the 
entire city to death (in alphabetical order: step forward 
Aaron A Aardvark), characterised his rule. He attained 
his position by brainwashing Judges, including the entire 
SJS, engineering the death of Chief Judge Goodman and 
framing Dredd, freshly returned from the Cursed Earth, as 
a murdering traitor. Dredd led the revolt, backed by the 
tutors of the Academy of Justice and the half-wit Under-
dweller, Fergee; Cal was killed on the day when he had set 
in course the destruction of Mega-City One.
Cal was highly volatile: cruel, unpredictable, driven by a 
sense of his own, semi-divine status and a deep-seated 
need to control absolutely everything strewn before him. He 
represented everything that Justice Department should not 
be and proof, were it needed, that absolute power corrupts 
absolutely.
Str 9 (+1), Dex 11 (+2), End 9 (+1), Int 8 (+0), Edu 11 (+1), 
Inf 12 (+2)
Skills: Advocate 2, Deception 2, Gun Combat (Lawgiver) 
3, Law 3, Melee (bludgeon) 1, Mega-City One History 1, 
Mega-City One Geography 1.
Traits: Insane.
Special Techniques: Formidable Presence.
Weapons: Lawgiver, but more importantly the backing of 
the SJS and a ready to desire to murder anyone in his path.
 Orlok the Assassin
Once a Judge of East-Meg One, Orlok was the one chosen 
to instigate Mega-City One’s downfall by infecting the city’s 
water supply with the drug that created Block Mania. Orlok 
managed to introduce the drug into the Weather Control 
systems and murdered several Judges in pursuit of his 

===PAGE 230===
 Crazies, Fatties, Muties & Perps
229
goal before Dredd stopped him and had him incarcerated. 
Later Orlok escaped and, when Nero Narcos instigated the 
Doomsday Scenario, he captured Dredd, taking him back to 
the Diktatorat (now in exile) to stand trial for East-Meg One’s 
destruction at the hand of its own missiles. Despite his part 
in genocide Orlok remained true to his Judge training and 
refused to be blackmailed into framing Dredd and assisted 
in Dredd’s escape from imprisonment.
Later Orlok attempted to bring slaughter to Mega-City One 
again, to conclude the original East-Meg One plan but was 
ﬁ nally thwarted and executed by Justice Department.
As a Judge, Orlok is a highly dangerous foe: cunning, 
resourceful and ruthless.
Str 11 (+2), Dex 12 (+2), End 11 (+2), Int 10 (+1), Edu 10 
(+1), Inf 9 (+1)
Skills: Admin 2, Computers 2, Deception 3, Gun Combat 
(Lawgiver) 4, Law 3, Melee (unarmed combat) 2, East-Meg 
One History 2, East-Meg One Geography 2, Mega-City One 
History 1, Mega-City One Geography 1, Physical Sciences 
(chemistry) 1, Stealth 2, Survival 2.
Special Techniques: Combat Acuity, Rapid Aim. 
Weapons: Hand Cannon but adept with any weapon he 
can ﬁ nd.
 PJ Maybe
The only child of the Maybe family and a relative of the 
wealthy Yess family, PJ Maybe was a child genius. He 
deliberately kept his high intelligence secret, by learning to 
spell badly and act stupidly, in order to get away with murder: 
literally. He committed his ﬁ rst murder at the age of 12, a 
random slaying of a couple chosen from the phone book. 
Maybe moved on to killing members of the Yess family, 
setting things up so his father could assume control of the 
company. After being captured by Judge Dredd, he was sent 
to the psyko cubes. An illustrious career followed, leading up 
to Maybe’s election (rigged, naturally) as Mayor of Mega-
City One – and even then, he has kept on killing.
PJ Maybe is super-bright, super-cunning, super-ruthless 
and very charismatic. Possessed of a natural chutzpah and 
ability to seemingly survive any disaster thrown at him, he 
prevails, despite a litany of heinous crimes…
Str 7 (+0), Dex 8 (+0), End 9 (+1), Int 14 (+2), Edu 14 (+2), 
Soc 12 (+2)
Skills: Admin 2, Advocate 2, Broker 1, Computers 2, Drive 
(wheeled) 1, Flyer (personal) 1, Gun Combat (slug pistols) 
1, Jack of All Trades 2, Mega-City One Geography 2, Mega-
City One History 2, Melee (unarmed combat) 2, Mechanic 1, 
Tactics 2, Streetwise 2, Survival 3.
Typical Weapons: Spitgun.
Armour: 2 points padding.
The  Judda
Clones, like Dredd, but created speci ﬁ cally by ex-Judge 
Judd to usurp power from Justice Department so that Judd 
could assume the mantle of Chief Judge, the Judda are 
utterly loyal to their father-creator and ruthless in the pursuit 
of their goal. Judd’s vision was of an entire city created by 
cloning to be compliant and law-abiding; Chief Judge Fargo 
himself stopped Judd’s plan and sentenced Judd to public 
execution – a sentence that was never carried out and led 
to Judd escaping to Ayres Rock, in Oz, where he set the 
plan to develop the Judda in motion, using a teleportation 
device to beam his warriors into the heart of the Grand Hall 
of Justice.
The Judda are, in some respects, the ultimate Judges. 
Completely in Judd’s thrall, they are strong, fast and 
utterly ruthless. If captured, Judda can self-induce 
a brain haemorrhage to avoid interrogation and, in 
combat, fight with their las-tridents with ruthless, Judge-
trained efficiency.
Str 12 (+2), Dex 12 (+2), End 13 (+2), Int 10 (+2), Edu 10 
(+2), Inf 10 (+2)
Skills: Computers 2, Deception 2, Gun Combat (Las-
Trident) 3, Law 2, Melee (unarmed combat) 3, Mega-City 
One History 1, Mega-City One Geography 1.
Traits: Brain Haemorrhage. If captured or put under 
interrogation, a Judda can self-induce a fatal brain 
haemorrhage.
Special Techniques:  Combat Acuity, Formidable 
Presence.
Weapons: Las-Trident. This weapon is effective up to 
medium range and discharges a burst of laser-plasma 
causing 6d6 damage.
Armour: 6 points of Judda Armour.

===PAGE 231===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 232===
 Robots
231
As robotics technology developed so did the use of robots 
in other areas: improved intellect circuits meant that robots 
could take over administration and bureaucratic tasks; 
decision-making circuits meant that roles requiring complex 
decision making could be given to robots without the 
complications of emotion introducing bias or prejudice into 
the process. The use of robots grew and the use of humans 
declined.
The argument was always that humans would have more 
time to pursue leisure activities; to enjoy themselves. But 
the social engineers who pressed for increasing robotisation 
ignored the fact that humans are, for their most part, 
creatures that must be kept occupied. If jobs are given to 
machines, leaving humans without purpose, they grow bored 
quickly. And with boredom comes frustration and despair. 
With frustration and despair comes fear and loathing. And 
with those, crime and depredation swiftly follows.
As robots took over more and more roles in society, crime 
grew in relation. But by the time this correlation was made, 
it was too late. Robots were too ingrained in society, 
too important. There could be no turning back. Robots 
dominated and humans were largely super ﬂ uous. Humans 
had lost the capabilities to ful ﬁ l the roles they occupied 
before robotisation. Dismantling the robotised systems of 
Mega-City One would be to both admit failure and to place 
the city at risk of hideous inef ﬁ ciency. Robots had to stay 
and humans would just have to accept it.
Just about every job of importance is being done or can be 
done, by a robot of one class or another. Robots are bosses 
and supervisors; they are teachers and zoom-train drivers; 
they are medics, doctors and surgeons. Every job, every 
role (save for the Judges) in Mega-City One will have robots 
engaged somewhere in the process – and often at the top.
In response, humans treat robots as slaves. Laws exist to 
recognise robots’ rights and the penalties to damaging a 
robot through hate-driven motives are stiff. But robots are 
still treated as subservient entities and more so following 
the two Robot Wars (see below) that have af ﬂ icted Mega-
City One. Yet, in reality, robots are the inheritors of Mega-
City One. They make it work, keep it functioning whilst 
around them humans live their meaningless hum-drum 
lives, congratulating themselves upon their technological 
advances.
The  Robot 
Wa rs
The First Robot War took place during 2099 when the 
carpentry robot, Call-Me-Kenneth, malfunctioned and 
attacked humans. Although destroyed, its brain was installed 
into a new body by misguided scientists and, stronger and 
more dysfunctional than before, it ran amok again – but this 
time managed to attract other robots to its cause.
Widescale robotic rebellion including just about every kind of 
droid, from humble servant units through to massive industrial 
robots, turning on humanity intending to wipe it out. Judge 
Dredd led the war against the rebel robots, even though he 
had resigned over Justice Department’s reluctance to pass 
tougher robot control legislation following Call-Me-Kenneth’s 
ﬁ rst breakdown.
Dredd discovered that Call-Me-Kenneth had malfunctioned 
to the point of tyranny. Kenneth subjugated robots in the 
same way humans had but exhibited even less mercy. A few 
brave robots were prepared to rebel and Dredd, captured by 
Call-Me-Kenneth and aided by Walter the vending machine 
robot, managed to mobilise a rebellion of robots against Call-
Me-Kenneth. After much blood and oil were shed, Kenneth 
was confronted on the Weather Control centre and tumbled 
to its ﬁ nal destruction.
The Second Robot war took place in 2121. The result of 
Nero Narcos’s attempts to seize control of Mega-City One, 
the circumstances behind the Robot War are far more 
complicated than a simple robot rebellion, as they involve 
agents of the destroyed East Meg One and the assassin 
Orlok, who helped trigger the Apocalypse War. However, 
the Assassinator robots of Narcos overran Mega-City One 
and a weakened Justice Department (sabotaged by rigged 
Lawgivers, designed to explode when ﬁ red by Judges) 
was forced into ﬁ ghting a guerrilla war against the massive 
armies of war droids. Dredd saved the situation with the 
help of Brit-Cit, which destroyed Narcos’s Cursed Earth-
based reinforcements. Dredd led his squad of Judges, 
supplemented by reprogrammed Assassinators, back into 
the city to turn the tables against Narcos.
The Second Robot War saw Senior Judge Hershey, now a 
member of the Council of Five, distinguish herself. It also saw 
the beleaguered Chief Judge Volt take his own life, dismayed 

===PAGE 233===
 Robots
232
at the failures in his judgement that allowed Narcos’s plans 
to almost succeed. From the ashes of the Second Robot 
War Hershey arose to become the Chief Judge of Mega-City 
One.
 Robots in 
Mega-City One
Robots are ubiquitous. Robots come in every size and 
shape. They are so common a ﬁ xture of society that citizens 
of Mega-City One do not even notice them unless something 
goes wrong. They are always there, in the background, 
working, getting on with their mechanical lives, a mechanised 
backdrop to a rigid society.
Judge Dredd lacks the space to go into a detailed robot 
design system, so the mechanics presented here are 
intended to allow Judge Dredd Referees to use a set of 
standards to design robots easily and to create new types 
to suit campaigns with relative ease. The fundamentals of 
robot design use the following template:
• Function – what is the robot’s purpose? This determines 
its software package and hence its skills.
• Conﬁ g – what sort of shape is the robot? Humanoid 
is the most common but countless other designs are 
found. Conﬁ g determines the robot’s locomotion to a 
certain extent.
• Size – how big is the robot, compared with a standard 
human? Size has a direct in ﬂ uence on the robot’s 
characteristics.
• Personality – does the robot have a personality? Many 
are simple drones, lacking any form of communication. 
Others have complex personalities, such as Walter, Judge 
Dredd’s former sycophantic vending machine droid.
• Characteristics – robot characteristics are based on those 
of humans but are inﬂ uenced by function and size.

===PAGE 234===
 Robots
233
Robots in the Judge Dredd stories are frequently used to 
drive storylines – as the various stories featuring Walter 
and the Robot Wars show. The aim of robots in the Judge 
Dredd game is therefore similar; not be conﬁ ned by detailed 
technical rules for building realistic robots but to create a 
framework so that when robots are needed, the system 
reﬂ ects the way they appear in the Judge Dredd tales.
All robots manufactured legally in Mega-City One are hard-
wired to prevent them ever breaking the law, no matter what 
provocation they or their owners face. They are also coded to 
avoid harming or allowing harm to come to, a human being. 
One of the ﬁ rst modiﬁ cations any perp will make to a robot, 
if he can spare the credits, is to insert a lawbreaker slug into 
its computer brain, allowing it to circumvent these hardwired 
rules and even attack humans upon request.
Function
Every robot has a primary function: what it is designed to 
do. Its function therefore determines its programming and its 
capabilities – which are essentially the same skills as those 
available to all characters in Judge Dredd.
There are six functional categories, each with a sub-
category. The Conﬁ g column shows which con ﬁ g options 
are available for robots in this Functional Category; the Size 
column shows the typical size ranges available – although 
smaller and larger variants can certainly be found; and the 
Personality column shows how many Personality Traits a 
Function Category has. Finally, the Will Modi ﬁ er is applied 
to the dice rolled for the Will characteristic of the robot (see 
Characteristics, on page 235).
Config
A robot’s conﬁ g largely determines how it looks and how it 
moves. The most popular con ﬁ g type is Humanoid, which 
means that the robot has two arms, two legs, something 
passing for a head and walks around in a manner that 
makes humans feel comfortable. It does not necessarily look 
human or behave in that way but its con ﬁ guration is similar. 
The Confg types are as follows:
Humanoid
The robot has two arms, two legs and a form of head, which 
generally houses visual receptors and audio systems. The 
robot walks with a human-like gait. Humanoid con ﬁ g types 
are limited to Sizes S, M and L.
Function 
Category Sub Category Conﬁ  g Size Personality
Will 
Modiﬁ er
Admin General Admin, Specialised 
Admin, PR/Customer Service, 
Data Processing
Predominantly 
Humanoid
S, M, L 1d3 0
Industrial 
Service
Production Line/Assembly, 
Specialised Production, 
Supervision, Management, 
Logistics, Warehouse
Humanoid, 
Humanoid-
Hybrid, Static
S, M, L, VL 1d3–1 –1
Domestic 
Service
Nanny, Cook, Butler, 
Housekeeper, General 
Domestic
Humanoid T, VS, S, M 1d3 +1
Teaching Primary Education, Higher 
Education, Specialised 
Education
Humanoid, 
Humanoid-
Hybrid
VS, S, M 1d3+1 +1
Manual 
Labour
Light Labour, Medium Labour, 
Heavy Labour, Super-Heavy 
Labour
Humanoid, 
Humanoid-
Hybrid, Static, 
Vehicular
M, L, VL, 
XL
1d3–1 0
Combat Light War Droid, Medium War 
Droid, Heavy War Droid, Super 
HeavyWar Droid. Specialised 
War Droid
Humanoid, 
Humanoid-
Hybrid, Static, 
Vehicular
M, L, VL, 
XL
1d3 –1

===PAGE 235===
 Robots
234
Humanoid-Hybrid
The upper part of the robot is humanoid – so, a torso, two 
arms and a head unit but the lower half – its locomotion – is 
designed to re ﬂ ect its function. A medium labour droid, for 
example, might have caterpillar tracks in place of legs. The 
locomotion types are as follows, with their game effects 
quantiﬁ ed:
Hover
The robot is ﬁ tted with an anti-grav unit allowing it to hover 
between a few centimetres and 3 metres above the ground. 
It can move at up to 7 metres per round. This form of 
locomotion is limited to S and M sized robots.
Tracked
The robot is ﬁ tted with caterpillar or tank tracks, allowing it 
to work effectively in rough terrain environments or those 
environments where high traction is essential. Tracked 
robots move at a base 5 metres per round and tracks can 
only be ﬁ  tted to M sizes and above. Tracked robots are 
able to climb stairs and negotiate inclines but their speed is 
halved when doing so.
Wheeled
The robot is ﬁ tted with between one and six wheels (mono 
and two-wheeled robots are gyroscopically stabilised). They 
can move at up to 8 metres per round but cannot negotiate 
stairs or very steep inclines. Wheels can be ﬁ tted to any 
robot of size S and above.
Multi-Legged
The robot is ﬁ tted with several legs (anything up to eight) and 
propels itself in an insect-like fashion. Multi-legged robots 
move at a base of 6 metres per round but gain +1 to Dex due 

===PAGE 236===
 Robots
235
to their high natural agility. Multi-legs cannot be ﬁ tted to any 
robot larger than size M.
Vehicular
Vehicular robots are, effectively, autonomous vehicles that 
require no driver or pilot and are able to complete routine 
tasks, such as loading and unloading, without any additional 
intervention. This con ﬁ g comes in L, VL and XL sizes only 
and must be either tracked or wheeled.
Static
Static robots are fashioned into shapes ﬁ tting their function 
– so are usually box shaped or shaped to meet a particular 
space requirement in their place of work. They have no 
locomotion of their own and remain in one place to complete 
their task. Static robots can be of any size.
Animal
Animal conﬁ gs are designed to resemble a particular animal, 
such as a dog, and are most usually multi-legged. Animal 
conﬁ gs come in S, M and L sizes.
Characteristics
Robots have the same physical characteristics as humans: 
Strength, Dexterity and Endurance and these characteristics 
are used in the same way as for any character in the 
Traveller Core Rulebook.
All robots have intelligence but this is not rated using a 
characteristic: it is a measure of the robot’s personality 
(see below) and its programming. All robots are designed 
to carry out speciﬁ c tasks and every robot will perform these 
tasks without question. Some robots do, however, have a 
higher measure of independent decision-making and this 
is represented by the Will characteristic. Will represents 
the robot’s ability to perform a task or instruction that goes 
beyond its function. For instance ordering a carpenter 
robot to go and make a cup of synthi-caf is surplus to its 
programming and it may or may not perform the task. Will is 
rolled on 2d6, with a modiﬁ er for the robot’s functional type, 
as noted above.
To discover if a robot can, or will, exceed its programming, 
roll 2d6 and add the robot’s Will DM. The target number for 
success depends on the task itself (see below)
• A simple task associated with the robot’s basic 
programming but with some slight differences: 4+.
• A simple task that is different to the robot’s basic 
programming but within its skill and physical capabilities: 
6+.
• A routine task that the robot would not normally be 
expected to accomplish: 8+.
• A difﬁ cult task contrary to its routine programming and 
one that can be legitimately questioned by its logic 
circuits: 10+.
Size
Robot size is graded into the following:
Tiny (T)   Less than 50mm in length, height and width
Very Small (VS)  50-500mm in length, height and width
Small (S)  500-1,000mm in length, height and width
Medium (M)  1,000-2,000mm in length, height and width
Large (L)  2,000-5,000mm in length, height and width
Very Large (VL)  5,000-10,000mm in length, height and width
Extra Large (XL)  10,000mm + in length, height and width
The size of the robot determines the type of con ﬁ g and locomotion it has available to it, as described above. Size also 
inﬂ uences the robot’s characteristics:
Size Strength Average Dexterity Average Endurance Average Will Average
T 1d3 2 (–2) 2d6+6 13 (+2) 1d3 2 (–2) 2d6 7 (0)
VS 1d3+1 3 (–1) 2d6+3 9 (+1) 1d3+1 3 (–1) 2d6 7 (0)
S 1d6 4 (–1) 2d6+3 9 (+1) 1d6 4 (–1) 2d6 7 (0)
M 2d6 7 (0) 2d6 7 (0) 2d6 7 (0) 2d6 7 (0)
L 2d6+2 9 (+1) 2d6 7 (0) 2d6+2 9 (+1) 2d6 7 (0)
VL 2d6+4 11(+1) 2d6–1 6 (0) 2d6+4 11(+1) 2d6 7 (0)
XL 2d6+8 15 (+3) 1d6 4 (–1) 2d6+8 15 (+3) 2d6 7 (0)

===PAGE 237===
 Robots
236
• A task completely and utterly against the robot’s 
programming, function and purpose: 12+.
For example, Judge Walker orders a shelf-
stacking robot in a Mega-City One mall to trip-
up a ﬂ  eeing perp who is running for the exit 
after having stolen some sucker citizen’s wallet. 
The Referee rules that this action is dif ﬁ cult 
and contrary to the robot’s programming. The 
robot must roll Will 10+ to obey Walker’s barked 
command. It has a Will of 4, giving it a –1 DM to 
the task, so it must roll 11+ to obey. The Referee 
rolls 6; the shelf-stacker robot looks blankly at 
Judge Walker, intones ‘The harming of shoppers 
as they go about their business is contrary to my 
nature, sir,’ and continues packing a shelf with 
boxes. The perp laughs, Walker curses and 
has to hobble the creep with a leg-shot. As he 
cuffs the screaming, bleeding perp, he warns 
the shelf-stacker droid that refusing to obey the 
commands of a Judge constitutes an Obstruction 
of Justice which could result in the robot being 
dismantled and used for spares. The robot, not 
really caring, continues to make the shelves look 
nice, tidy and full.
Personality
Robots are given a personality in order to make it easier for 
humans to interact with them. All robots respond to verbal 
commands and reply with vocalised con ﬁ rmations but the 
injection of one or more personality traits gives the robot a 
certain individuality and character and makes the process 
of dealing with a robot less of a chore for those who have 
to interact with them on a regular basis (or more of one, 
depending on the prevalent traits).
The number of Personality traits a robot has is determined 
by its Function. If the die roll results in 0, which it may do, 
then the robot has no discernible personality, responding in 
a clinical, functional, emotionless manner.
Where Personality traits are present, these can be chosen 
to ﬁ t the nature of the droid or rolled randomly on d66 on 
the below table. Not all personality traits are necessarily 
pleasant or co-operative; robot designers often introduce 
‘negative’ traits to liven-up the somewhat dull process of 
personality encoding or introduce negative traits to re ﬂ ect 
the robot’s function.
d66 Trait
11 Abusive
12 Agreeable
13 Altruistic
14 Ambivalent
15 Apathetic
16 Appealing
21 Belligerent
22 Bombastic
23 Chivalrous
24 Commanding
25 Compliant
26 Condescending
31 Contrary
32 Decisive
33 Dedicated
34 Deferential
35 Diplomatic
36 Dogmatic
41 Fawningly Polite
42 Gruff
43 Grumbling
44 Humorous
45 Indecisive
46 Introspective
51 Level-headed
52 Morose
53 Optimistic
54 Pessimistic
55 Philosophical
56 Rebellious
61 Sarcastic
62 Selﬁ sh
63 Submissive
64 Sycophantic
65 Ultra Loyal
66 Voluble
Where two or more traits are contradictory, either roll 1d6 to 
see which trait is dominant (the higher the result, the more 
dominant the trait) or re-roll one of the traits.
Programming
Robots are programmed with a set of skills enabling them to 
do their designated job within their function. Every robot is 
programmed with at least the following:
• A primary skill at level 2
• A secondary skill at level 1
• A tertiary skill at level 0.

===PAGE 238===
 Robots
237
The primary skill always re ﬂ ects the core function of the 
robot. For instance, a Butler robot comes with Steward 2 
as standard and may have Diplomat at 1 and Broker at 0. 
Choose the skills to ﬁ t the robot’s function.
Every robot then comes with an additional 1d6–2 skills (treat 
a result of –1 as 0) skills. One of these skills will be at level 1 
and the remainder at level 0. Again, these skills ﬁ t the robot’s 
general function but need not re ﬂ ect the speci ﬁ c role it is 
designed for. Again, for instance, a Butler robot may come 
with Advocate 1, Drive 0 and Medic 0.
If, for game purposes, a robot needs one of its primary, 
secondary or tertiary skills to be higher than those given for 
standard robots, Referees can increase them, but no robot 
may exceed 4 in a primary skill, 2 in a secondary skill or 2 on 
a tertiary skill. As a general rule, robots with raised skills in 
these areas will have no additional skills.
Referees are encouraged to create skills not found in 
the Traveller Core Rulebook  to reﬂ  ect a robot’s 
functional programming. For example, a Robo-Chef may 
have programmes for Cooking and Chopping; neither are 
standard Traveller skills but the robot can be reasonably 
assumed to have these routines programmed as part of its 
functionality.
Armour and Weapons
Any robot can be armoured and indeed combat models generally 
are. The amount of ‘natural’ armour a robot comes with depends 
on its size; additional armour depends on its function.
Size
Size Armour
T0
VS 0
S1
M1
L2
VL 3
XL 4
Add the armour modi ﬁ er for the robot’s sub-category to the 
armour for its size to ﬁ nd its overall armour protection.
Weapons
Only combat robots come equipped with weapons although 
industrial robots will have will tools that can be used 
offensively (witness Call-Me-Kenneth and its fearsome 
carpentry drills and saws).
Combat robots can carry a weapon in each hand or have 
a weapon attached to each arm, if humanoid or humanoid-
hybrid in conﬁ g. In addition, a combat robot can have further 
weapon mounts – integrated hard points – to which weapons 
can be added. The number of weapon mounts depends on 
the combat robot’s size:
Size Weapon Mounts Basic Fire Control 
Program
T1 0
VS 1 0
S1 0
M2 1
L2 2
VL 3 3
XL 4 4
Any of the weapons found in the Equipment chapter can 
be ﬁ tted to a weapon mount, although the size of the weapon 
is obviously a factor.
One weapon mount can accommodate one weapon of up 
to 6kg in mass. If a weapon of a larger mass is required, 
then multiple weapon mounts, if available, must be used. 
For example, a war droid with 2 weapon mounts could carry 
an integrated missile launcher (8kg) but the launcher would 
occupy both weapon mounts.
In combat, the number of weapons a combat robot can ﬁ re 
simultaneously depends on its programming. Fire Control/0 
allows the robot to ﬁ re one weapon at a time at its Gun Combat 
skill rating. Any additional weapons ﬁ red simultaneously will 
be at a –3 untrained skill modi ﬁ er. Fire Control/1 allows an 
Function
Function Category Sub Category Armour Modi ﬁ er
Admin +0
Industrial Service +1
Domestic Service +0
Teaching +1
Manual Labour Light Labour +1, Medium Labour +2, Heavy Labour +2, Super-Heavy Labour +3
Combat Light War Droid +2, Medium War Droid +4, Heavy War Droid +6, Super Heavy War 
Droid +8, Specialised War Droid +6

===PAGE 239===
 Robots
238
additional weapon to be used at the Gun Combat skill rating; 
Fire Control/2 allows 2 additional weapons and so on. The 
Basic Fire Control Program of the table above shows the 
level of Fire Control program combat robots come equipped 
with, again based on size.
Improvised Weapons
Robots that are not equipped with weapons but have tools 
(and this includes metal limbs capable of being used as 
clubs) integrated as part of their function, can use these 
items as Improvised Weapons if their safety programming 
is overcome to allow them to act offensively. Attacks are 
always at a –3 untrained skill modi ﬁ er, unless the robot can 
use a particular skill related to its function to in ﬂ ict damage 
and the target is in a position where the skill can be used 
effectively. For instance, a damaged Robo-Chef is equipped 
with a meat cleaver on one of its arms. If it is ﬂ ailing around 
and striking out randomly, its attacks are at –3. However, if it 
manages to come across a human who is prone and unable 
to do more than struggle (like a piece of meat, waiting to be 
butchered), it can use its Chopping 1 skill to make an attack. 
Likewise, a Call-Me-Kenneth carpentry model could use its 
Woodworking program to employ its saws, drills, chisels and 
so on, against similarly helpless opponents.
Customising 
Robots
Whilst robots rarely excite the same passion in citizens as 
their vehicles do, many still believe it worthwhile to modify a 
robot beyond its manufacturer’s speciﬁ cations in an effort to 
increase its capabilities. Such customisation therefore tends to 
be very practical in nature. Perps are often very keen to modify 
their robots to engage in a variety of illegal activities they are 
unwilling to participate in themselves. The ﬁ tting of weapons 
and additional armour is common, though most perps will seek 
to get their hands on the valuable lawbreaker slug that will 
allow their robots to ignore the value of human life, potentially 
turning them into lethal battle machines. All modi ﬁ cations 
listed require a full day’s work, a mechanical toolkit and either 
an Engineer (electronics), Engineer (robotics) or Mechanic 
roll of 8+ to successfully complete. If the skill roll is failed, 
another attempt may be made on another day. Alternatively, 
a character may take the robot to a repair centre to have the 
modiﬁ cation performed automatically. However, this will take 
1d6 days and increase the cost of each modiﬁ cation by 50%. 
With the exception of the memory module and lawbreaker 
module, these modi ﬁ cations may only be purchased for 
robots, not computers.
Armour
A robot’s armour can be increased by 1 at a cost of Cr. 1,000. 
To increase a robot’s original armour by 2 costs Cr. 2,000, 
3 points will cost Cr. 4,000 and so on, doubling each time. 
Small and Medium robots may not have their armour score 
increased by more than 3  points in total. The maximum 
armour score a robot may have is 15.
Additional and Concealed 
Weapon Mounts
Any robot with manipulating hands may carry and use a 
weapon, just as any human can. However, some citizens 
desire to have weaponry permanently mounted on their 
robot and so ﬁ t weapons that spring up from concealed 
hatches when needed. A weapon mount costs Cr. 2,000 
for every 6kg of mass it can accommodate. A concealed 
weapon mount costs Cr. 5,000.
Memory Module
Capacity to store new programs is always at a premium in a 
robot’s computerized brain, particularly if it has been running 
for some time and is already full of necessary information. 
Additional memory modules are often purchased to expand a 
robot’s memory beyond its original speci ﬁ cations, allowing it 
a far greater ﬂ exibility. A memory module costs Cr. 2,500 and 
grants a robot an additional level in the programmed skill.
Lawbreaker Module
Highly illegal, the lawbreaker module commands an 
incredibly high price on the black market as ﬁ tting one into 
a robot’s computerised brain will allow it to break any law of 
Mega-City One, including attacking a human. The lawbreaker 
module effectively provides and +8 DM to the robot’s Will 
characteristic. Lawbreaker modules cost Cr. 2,500 although 
permits are almost impossible to get hold of from the Justice 
Department. On the black market, a lawbreaker module 
costs Cr. 4,000. Fitting a lawbreaker module also requires 
an electronic toolkit.
Synthi-Skin
Medium sized Humanoid con ﬁ g robots can be coated with 
Synthi-Skin, a ﬂ esh-like coating giving the robot an almost 
completely human appearance. At a casual glance or from 
a distance, a Synthi-Skinned robot looks like any other 
citizen, although on a close and detailed inspection the lack 
of imperfections in the skin betray the robot’s real nature. A 
Synthi-Skin coating requires special machinery to apply, which 
itself costs Cr. 500,000. Taking a robot to a specialists who 
will apply the coating costs Cr. 20,000. Justice Department 

===PAGE 240===
 Robots
239
licenses are necessary to have a robot legally covered in this 
way and a license costs Cr. 5,000 and permits up to three 
robots to be covered. Illegally skinning a robot or possessing 
a ‘skin-job’, earns up to 5 years in the cubes.
Sample 
Robots
Assassin Robot, Hondai War 
Systems KTT12
Highly illegal in Mega-City One, Hondai War Systems’ 
imported assassin robots have been linked to a number of 
mobster slayings and, despite the Justice Department’s best 
efforts, their use seems to be on the increase. The KTT12 has 
one of the most advanced brains ever developed but its great 
technology is channelled into just one thing: combat. Assassin 
robots are lethal killers, capable of gaining entry into almost 
any fortress and destroying all organised resistance. A single 
assassin robot has been known to take multiple blasts from 
heavy weapons and still reach its target fully operational. Even 
a well-trained Judge will prove no match for the KTT12 once it 
has been unleashed. The cost of this robot is all but prohibitive 
to even the wealthiest of perps and racketeers but it is certainly 
the weapon of choice when a slaying must be certain.
Specialised War Droid
Size: M; Conﬁ g: Humanoid
Str 12 (+2), Dex 12 (+2), End 10 (+1), Will 6 (+8 Lawbreaker 
Module)
Weapons: Any Assigned
Armour: 7
Programming: Melee (unarmed combat) 2, Gun Combat (all 
weapon types) 3, Tactics 1, Survival 0
Modiﬁ cations: Lawbreaker Module
Personality Traits: Ruthless, Cruel
Construction Mek, British 
LeyMek Block-Smasher
It is an urban myth that a team of demolition droids can smash 
an entire dilapidated block apart within a single day, a truism 
British LeyMek took to heart when creating their new model. 
The Block-Smasher stands almost 20 metres tall, towering 
over citizens as it sets to work. Because of their awe-inspiring 
size, the vast majority of Block-Smashers are programmed 
with a cheery personality to better calm nervous citizens 
wary of their huge, crushing demolition tools. Their tiny 
computerised brains seem all but inadequate for the robots’ 
huge size though British LeyMek assures its customers that 
not one Block-Smasher has ever gone rogue.
Heavy Industry Robot
Size: XL; Conﬁ g: Humanoid-Hybrid (tracked)
Str 18 (+4), Dex 4 (–1), End 18 (+4), Will 4 (–1)
Weapons: Smashing Arms and Wrecking Balls (x2): 8d6 
damage
Armour: 7
Programming: Demolition 2, Rubble Removal 1
Modiﬁ cations: None
Personality Traits: None
General Purpose Robot, Hondai 
Tee-Kay Mk II
There are millions of Hondai Tee-Kay general purpose 
robots to be found within Mega-City One, though the Mk 
II has proven to be the most popular model by far. Pre-
programmed with a range of generic functions whilst still 
allowing space for further customisation, the Mk II sees 
service throughout the city, from the depths of the sewer 
systems to the peak of the highest blocks. Flexible enough 
to perform almost any task a human can, the Mk II is readily 
adaptable to a multitude of roles.
Service/Labour Robot
Size: M; Conﬁ g: Humanoid
Str 8 (+0), Dex 10 (+1), End 10 (+1), Will 6 (+0)
Weapons: None but is capable of an attack, robot arms inﬂ ict 
Unarmed Attack damage of 1d6+1
Armour: 2
Programming: Various but typically: Admin 2, Broker 1, 
Steward 1, Diplomat 0
Modiﬁ cations: None.
Personality Traits: Obedient, Loyal
Robodoc, Moderna Robots Mk 
IX
The standard medical robot of the Justice Department, the 
Mk IX can be found in almost every ambulance and hospital 
across Mega-City One. The Mk IX is capable of treating almost 
any patient on its own initiative, from delivering critical ﬁ rst aid 
to performing major surgery within a speeding ambulance. 
Once in the care of a robodoc, an injured citizen can be almost 
sure he will survive whatever injuries he is suffering. Many 
hospitals enhance the software packages of their robodocs in 
order to grant them the ability to conduct advanced research 
and experiments, thus furthering the cause of medicine without 
having to waste valuable human doctors.
Specialised Medical Robot
Size: M; Conﬁ g: Humanoid (4 arms)
Str 8 (+0), Dex 15 (+3), End 10 (+1), Will 5 (–1)
Weapons: Robodocs carry a variety of medical tools that can 
become improvised weapons: syringes, bone-saws, scalpels, 
drills and so forth. Each super- ﬂ ex arm can be ﬁ tted with a 
different implement to allow the robodoc to perform several 
different physical operations simultaneously.

===PAGE 241===
 Robots
240
Armour: 2
Programming: Diagnose 4, Life Sciences (biology) 2, Medic 
4, Surgery 3
Modiﬁ cations: Every robodoc has an integrated medipack 
good for up to 10 uses before it needs replenishing.
Personality Traits: Compassionate, Clinical
Robodog, Lethal Response Inc. 
Defender
A citizen’s city-block apartment is his fortress and many 
spend countless credits defending their property. The use 
of robodogs comes under regular annual review from the 
Justice Department but so far they remain legal so long as 
they are only ever activated within a citizen’s own property. 
Programmed with a variety personalities, robodogs can be 
loyal and loving pets to their owners but instantly turn into 
savage killing machines should the owner be attacked. As 
such, many would-be burglars have met a very grisly end at 
the teeth of a well-maintained robodog. 
Servitor/Protection Robot
Size: M; Conﬁ g: Animal (4 legs)
Str 10 (+1), Dex 15 (+3), End 9 (+1), Will 7 (+0)
Weapons: Steel Jaws, 1d6+2 damage
Armour: 2
Programming: Athletics (co-ordination) 2, Melee (unarmed 
combat) 1, Steward 0
Modiﬁ cations: Some robodogs are synthi-skinned for a more 
authentic look.
Personality Traits: Loyal, Sycophantic (or Cynical)
Servo-Droid, Moderna Robots 
Silver Service 14
Not all citizens want, or can afford, the versatility offered by 
most general purpose robots and are simply looking for a 
device that can help keep their apartments clean, prepare 
food and give a cheerful greeting in the morning The Moderna 
Robots Silver Service 14 is typical of the millions of servo-
droids found throughout Mega-City One Wherever a general 
purpose robot would prove to be ludicrously expensive, 
servo-droids are usually found and many citizens possess 
their own.
Service/Labour Robot
Size: M; Conﬁ g: Humanoid
Str 6 (+0), Dex 8 (+0), End 10 (+1), Will 2 (–2)
Weapons: None but if capable of an attack, robot arms inﬂ ict 
Unarmed Attack damage of 1d6+1
Armour: 2
Programming: Various but typically: Steward 1, Admin 0
Modiﬁ cations: None.
Personality Traits: Obedient, Sycophantic, Caring
Rossum Systems Combat Droid, 
MkVI
Used extensively in the Atomic War, these hybrid, tracked, 
combat droids are designed for rapid movement over hostile 
terrain and for delivering varied death upon an enemy. 
Fashioned into the likeness of old American GI troops (but 
with tracks, clearly), their faces are grotesque parodies of 
the human form, to match their combat programming. Illegal 
in Mega-City One, rogue Combat Droids of the MkVI variety 
are sometimes found in isolated regions of the Cursed Earth 
where they still believe the war rages on and humans (of any 
kind) are the enemy.
Standard War Droid
Size: L; Conﬁ g: Humanoid-Hybrid (tracked)
Str 12 (+2), Dex 8 (+0), End 15 (+3), Will 12 (+2 – but 
the ﬂ awed programming is considered a +8 Lawbreaker 
Module)
Weapons: 1x Heavy Spitgun, 1 x Laser Ri ﬂ e, 1 x Missile 
Launcher (weapon mount) with 4 x Concussion Grenades 
and 4 x Hand Bombs
Armour: 6
Programming: Melee (unarmed combat) 1, Gun Combat (all 
weapon types) 2, Tactics 1, Survival 1
Personality Traits: Obedient, Militaristic, Warlike


===PAGE 242===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 243===
 Macs Database
242
Mega-City One 
 Timeline
2023
The Volgan War between east and west ends. America, with 
a population approaching a billion people, begins the Mega-
City programme, with the ﬁ rst city, Mega-City One, focused 
on the Boston/Washington/New York/Atlanta axis. In time, 
the city will sweep the eastern seaboard from the Canadian 
border at Niagara down to Miami in Florida.
2031-2039
Mega-City One nears completion. Mega-City Two is already 
under development, with plans in place for Texas City. Each 
city is designed to hold around 100 million people; by 2039 
the populations have already exceeded these limits.
2040-2047
Mega-City One is deemed ﬁ nished in 2047. Mega-Cities 
Two and Three begin development. It is becoming clear, 
within months of Mega-City One’s completion, that traditional 
A Note on the Timeline
Judge Dredd’s story is extensive and sprawling 
– just like Mega-City One itself. Time travel, 
made possible by the Proteus device developed 
by Tek Division, allowed Dredd and Anderson to 
visit the city in the year 2120. This established a 
parallel timeline that makes the standard linear 
timeline convoluted in terms of explanation. 
Other events in both Dredd’s career and Mega-
City One’s history occur in parallel with the 
timeline presented here (notably The Dead Man 
story, heralding the epic Necropolis story) and 
these are left undocumented, mainly for the 
sake of simplicity.
The best reference for charting Mega-City One’s 
history is, of course, 2000 AD or the Complete 
Case Files. Judge Dredd Players and Referees 
are highly recommended to read these stories 
for themselves. The timeline give in this 
chapter offers a very, very brief account of 
the Dredd saga’s highlights.
policing and judicial methods are inadequate for the 
burgeoning population. Gangs, centred on the lower levels 
of Mega-City One and based around the old geographical 
city areas, begin to form, challenging both the police and 
government.
2051
Chief Judge Fargo attempts suicide. Solomon reluctantly 
takes over as Chief Judge. Judge Judd outlines his ideas 
for cloning.
2058
Solomon steps down, in favour of Chief Judge Clarence 
Goodman and returns to the streets where he is happiest.
2066
A new process of accelerated cloning, coupled with Genetic 
Control screening for potential Judge material, means that 
candidates are able to become full Judges in record time. 
The ﬁ rst experiments in these cloning techniques result in 
the creation of Joe and Rico Dredd. The two clones emerge 
from the vats at roughly the age of ﬁ ve and fully prepared for 
the tough training of the Judge programme.
2070
Caught in a maze of corruption, smears, diplomatic wrangling 
and political assassination, President Robert L Booth of the 
USA starts the Atomic Wars, which rapidly devastate most of 
the USA, Russia and Europe. The Mega-Cities escape direct 
nuclear attack thanks to the experimental laser defence 
systems installed just a year earlier. The Judges, already 
prepared for Booth’s treachery, have stockpiled arms and 
take the lead in the resistance against the President’s tyrant. 
Booth maintains control over America’s robotic army and a 
bloody civil war begins between the Judges and government 
troops. Cadet Judges Dredd and Rico are drafted into the 
active Justice Department forces and distinguish themselves 
in combat. The citizens petition the Judges to take over the 
running of the country.
2071
Most of America is in ruins: the lands between the Mega Cities 
turned into the scorched, irradiated wasteland known as the 
Cursed Earth. Booth’s Presidential Guard is ﬁ nally defeated 
at the Battle of Armageddon but only at the cost of the lives 
of a hundred thousand Judges and mek-troops. Judge 
Solomon, acting in his temporary position as Grand Judge 
for all three Mega-Cities, makes the famous ‘Judgement of 

===PAGE 244===
 Macs Database
 Macs Database
243

===PAGE 245===
 Macs Database
244
Solomon’ speech, stating that the deposed Booth should be 
put into suspended animation and entombed in Fort Knox for 
one hundred years.
2072
A steady in ﬂ ow of homeless refugees from the ruins of the 
Cursed Earth swells the post-war populations of the Mega-
Cities; Mega-City One swells to 550 million; Mega-City Two 
to 350 million; and Mega-City Three to 260 million. Increasing 
numbers of city blocks are built but demand outstrips the 
supply and many citizens form shantytowns outside the 
walls of the Mega Cities. Improved construction techniques 
and new synthetic materials ease congestion somewhat 
but space in the Mega Cities is still at a premium and so 
draconian immigration conditions are imposed on city entry. 
Millions are condemned to return to the Cursed Earth.
2079
Joe and Rico Dredd graduate with honours to become full 
Judges. Judge Morph grants Joe Dredd his Full Eagle, 
proclaiming him the most talented and capable cadet he has 
ever graduated. A few months after leaving the Academy, 
Rico succumbs to corruption leading to his arrest by his 
own clone brother. Dredd arrests Rico for the various 
crimes including accepting bribes, vice and murder. Rico 
is sentenced to twenty years on the penal colony of Titan. 
He fathers a daughter when he engages in a relationship 
with a journalist visiting the colony. For a time after, Dredd 
offers emotional support for his niece but eventually comes 
to realise that his life as a Judge is incompatible with that 
as a father ﬁ gure and he turns his back on Rico’s daughter, 
dedicating himself wholeheartedly to the law.
2083-2086
Following years of wrangling over the questions of 
independence and government, civil war breaks out between 
Mega Cities One and Three. Mega-City Three asserts it is 
being disenfranchised by the other Mega Cities and that its 
individual identity is being subsumed. Mega Cities One and 
Two oppose the idea of an independent Mega-City Three in 
the interests of unity; however – and more importantly – the 
valuable resources controlled by Mega-City Three would be 
placed at risk.
 The war ends in stalemate and Mega-City 
One allows Mega-City Three to declare its independence. 
Mega-City Three adopts the name Texas City; Mega Cities 
One and Two develop closer links and form ‘The Union’.
2088
Luna-1 is established on the Moon in a project shared by all 
three Mega-Cities. Although it is hailed as a great scienti ﬁ c 
achievement, it is seen by many as a diplomatic exercise, 
designed to renew and cement relations with Texas City. 
Government of the colony is divided initially between all 
three cities, with a senior Judge being sent every six months 
to preside as Chief Judge.
2088-2099
Dredd cements his own reputation as Mega-City One’s 
foremost lawman.
2099
William “Whitey” Logan murders Judge Alvin for kicks 
while holed up in the old Empire State Building. Whitey is 
apprehended by Dredd and sentenced to life on the ‘Devil’s 
Island’ hi-speed Mega Circular prison.
In the same year the gigantic Statue of Judgement honouring 
the Judges, is unveiled. Its stands next to, but dwarfs, 
the Statue of Liberty. The city’s population has risen to a 
staggering 620 million in the city blocks and in other, static 
habitats and an estimated 18 million perpetually driving the 
highways of the city in mopads. 
The robot, Call-me-Kenneth, malfunctions and triggers 
the First Robot War. Dredd leads the ﬁ ght-back against 
the mechanical revolutionaries and eventually destroys 
Call-Me-Kenneth with the help of ﬁ fth columnist robots 
opposed to Kenneth’s tyrannical ways. Anti-robot lobbies 
follow in the wake of the war but radical Justice Department 
reforms ensure that robots cannot rebel against their human 
masters.
Rico Dredd returns to Mega-City One, having completed his 
20-year stretch on Titan, and is killed by Joe Dredd while 
attempting to take his revenge.
2100
The Mega-City 5000 bike race ends in Spikes Harvey Rotten 
failing to make the ﬁ nishing post after Dredd intervenes. He 
is sentenced to life in the iso-cubes for a variety of crimes.
Mega-City Two falls prey to the deadly viral disease, 
2T(FRU)T, which threatens the very existence of the city, 
turning those af ﬂ icted into insatiable cannibals. Dredd is 
given the task of getting the vaccine to Mega-City Two via 
an overland mission. Knowing he will need someone with 
outstanding bike skills, Spikes Harvey Rotten is released 
from custody and accompanies the Cursed Earth expedition. 
Spikes is killed as Dredd approaches Mega-City Two and 
falls-foul of old but vengeful war-droids led by the murderous 
General Blood n Nuts. Dredd ﬁ nally reaches the Mega-City 
with the vaccine and arranges for Tweak, an intelligent and 
peaceful rock-eating alien, to be returned to his home planet, 
keeping the secrets of Tweak’s world (an abundance of 
valuable precious metals and ores) from humans.

===PAGE 246===
 Macs Database
245
2101
Dredd returns to Mega-City One from his Cursed Earth 
mission to ﬁ nd that, in his absence, Deputy Chief Judge 
Cal’s power and in ﬂ uence with the SJS has increased 
dramatically. A robot look-alike is used to try and frame 
Dredd for a variety of crimes, including murder, and Dredd 
is sentenced to Titan like Rico before him. He manages to 
escape but is powerless to prevent Chief Judge Goodman 
from being murdered on the orders of Judge Cal, who takes 
control of Mega-City for a one hundred day reign of terror. 
Judges Grif ﬁ n and Dredd lead the resistance movement 
against Cal, employing effective guerrilla tactics to strike 
at the feared SJS and Cal’s feared alien mercenaries, the 
Kleggs. Cal, spiralling into greater acts of criminal insanity, 
plunges to his death before he can execute the entire 
city, taken-out by the semi-troglodyte simpleton, Fergee, 
a denizen of the city-bottom sewer slums close to the Big 
Smelly River.
2102
Judge Death arrives in Mega-City One, having crossed 
the boundaries separating his dimension from our own 
– a world where life itself has been declared a crime. Judge 
Death has come to judge Mega-City One and he slaughters 
dozens of citizens before his corporeal body is destroyed by 
Dredd. When the creature possesses Psi Judge Cassandra 
Anderson, she sacri ﬁ ces herself by allowing herself to be 
sealed in Boing®, trapping Death’s spirit within her mind.
In the same year as Death’s appearance, Psi Judge 
Feyy predicts doom for Mega-City One in 2120 
unless the Judge Child, destined to be the Chief 
Judge, can be found. Dredd leads the search, 
accompanied by Judges Larter, Lopez and 
Hershey. The quest takes them to Texas City 
and the ﬁ  rst run-in with the murderous Angel 
Gang, before they are forced to follow the ﬂ eeing 
Angels, who have abducted the Judge Child, across the 
galaxy. Judge Lopez dies following the taking of Oracle 
Spice in a bid to locate the Judge Child but Dredd tracks the 
Angel Gang and Judge Child to the planet Xanadu where 
the Angels are killed. Dredd understands that the Judge 
Child, Owen Krysler, has manipulated a trail of murder and 
mayhem across the galaxy and so he leaves the boy to his 
fate, returning to Mega-City One alone.
2103
Judge Death is freed by his compatriots; Judges Fear, Fire 
and Mortis. When the Dark Judges seal off Billy Carter 
Block and begin murdering its population, Judge Dredd and 
the revived Judge Anderson enter the block and force the 
indestructible beings to retreat across the dimensional span 

===PAGE 247===
 Macs Database
246
to their own, dead world. Anderson and Dredd follow the 
creatures and Anderson channels the wrath of the lost souls 
on Deadworld to exorcise the Dark Judges.
2104
A series of Block Wars accelerate into Block Mania, under 
the inﬂ uence of Orlok the Assassin, a Sov Bloc agent who 
has contaminated Mega-City One’s water supply to induce 
the citywide Block Wars. The Mega-City erupts into chaos, 
with Block War affecting every single sector and even Judges 
succumbing to the condition. An antidote is developed but it 
is now too late. East-Meg One’s plan to destroy Mega-City 
One is in full spin and Mega-City One is almost powerless 
to resist.
Supreme Judge Bulgarin of East-Meg One launches an all-
out nuclear strike heralding the Apocalypse War. Prolonged 
ﬁ ghting devastates both the Mega-City One and Sov Bloc 
sides but a daring raid into Sov territory results in the 
obliteration of East-Meg One by its own missiles and the 
invaders ﬁ nally surrender. Chief Judge Grif ﬁ n has been 
killed in the war, along with over four hundred million other 
citizens and Judges. Most of Mega-City One is in ruins and 
millions are homeless, setting up more makeshift shanty 
towns in and outside the city walls. Judge McGruder, head 
of the SJS, takes over as Chief Judge.
2105
The city is gradually rebuilt, bringing some much-needed 
employment to Mega-City One citizens but many parts still 
lie in irradiated ruin.
2106
Tek Division produces the Proteus, a prototype time 
machine. The machine is used by Judges Anderson and 
Dredd to travel forward to 2120, in order to discover the truth 
of Judge Feyy’s ﬁ nal prediction. In 2120 they discover the 
ruined Mega-City, ruled over by the Mutant, a vastly powerful 
psionic being created from the cloned tissue of Owen Krysler, 
the Judge Child. Dredd loses his eyes in combat and battles 
his undead future self. The Judges return to 2106 with the 
undead version of Dredd, and Chief Judge McGruder orders 
the termination of the Grunwalder – the robot leader of the 
Xanadu enclave where Dredd had left the Judge Child, and 
the destruction of his castle in an attempt to prevent the 
calamity from taking place. The inactive undead Dredd is 
placed in the Justice Department’s Black Museum and Judge 
Dredd is ﬁ tted with bionic eyes (an operation he grudgingly 
admits he should have had done years before).
2107
Judge Anderson is lured to Deadworld and duped into 
reviving the Dark Judges, who subsequently leave her for 
dead when they return to Mega-City One. The Dark Judges 
use their Dimension Jump technology to teleport across 
the city, always one step ahead of the Judges and killing 
thousands in the process. Eventually Psi-Division manages 
to predict their arrival point and the Dark Judges are trapped 
in limbo through the use of a prototype Justice Department 
Dimension Jump device.
2108
Shujan, the Warlord of Ji, a powerful oriental psion, comes to 
Mega-City One and raises the Seven Samurai – immensely 
powerful demonic entities that threaten the very security of 
the city. Shujan and the samurai are destroyed through the 
efforts of Psi-Division but the situation would not have arisen 
if Chief Judge McGruder had not been so cautious in her 
handling of the Warlord in the ﬁ rst place. McGruder resigns 
as Chief Judge and takes the Long Walk. Judge Silver 
assumes Chief Judge tenure. The Democratic movement 
in the city gains momentum, prompted by the death, at the 
hands of the Judges, of pro-democratic lobbyists.
Democratic Tendency takes over Channel 48 breakfast 
show. Mega-City One housewife, Hester Hyman, makes 
an impassioned plea to the people of the city to challenge, 
peacefully, the authoritarianism of the Judges. The members 
of Democratic Tendency are killed in a showdown with 
Judges but the seeds of a democratic uprising are sown, 
especially in the mind of Hester’s peaceful, law-abiding 
husband, Gort.
2109
A colony war on the fringes of the galaxy results in 8 million 
pints of blood being required for the human casualties. 
Mega-City One citizens face a compulsory blood donation 
programme. Rumours spread that Justice Department 
is selling the donated blood at a pro ﬁ t and at least one 
needle-phobic citizen manages to waste over 3,000 pints of 
donated blood when he panics and crashes a hov-car into 
the containers loading donated blood into a shuttle transit.
The democratic movement arises again with new leaders. 
Peaceful protests are called against Justice Department and 
Chief Judge Silver puts Dredd in charge of discrediting the 
protesters using any means possible. Justice Department 
uses a variety of dirty tricks, intimidation and smear tactics 
to limit the demonstration’s impact but still 16 million citizens 

===PAGE 248===
 Macs Database
247
march on the Grand Hall of Justice. Judges use strategically 
placed sonic cannon and Wally Squad crowd in ﬁ ltrators to 
disrupt and demoralise the protesters and, as the march 
descends into violence, the Judges deftly deal with the pro-
democracy movement, crushing it completely.
Although Dredd is responsible for crushing the march, he 
has doubts over the validity of his actions.
Later that year, Marlon ‘Chopper’ Shakespeare, the Midnight 
Surfer, escapes Mega-City One whilst being transferred to a 
more remote iso-block. Supersurf 10, being legally staged 
in Oz City, has brought the citizens to their feet to demand 
Chopper’s release as Mega-City One’s contender. Chopper 
treks to Oz from Mega-City One atop his powerboard where 
he ﬁ nally competes but loses the contest to Jug McKenzie, 
the Oz favourite to win. Chopper, despite his escape, is 
given his freedom by the Oz Judges.
Whilst Chopper competes in the Supersurf, the Judda, 
clone super-Judges created by the founder of the Justice 
Department’s cloning programme, Judge Judd, assault the 
Grand Hall of Justice using teleport devices. Dredd, out in 
Oz to apprehend Chopper, traces the Judda to Ayres Rock 
and inﬁ ltrates Judge Judd’s mad revenge scheme, ﬁ nding 
the cloned Judda worshipping Judd as a demigod. A nuclear 
warhead is teleported into Ayres Rock, bringing the Judda’s 
short-lived tyranny to an end.
2111
Kraken, last of the Judda clones in Mega-City One, is failed by 
Dredd on his Full Eagle Day despite a ﬂ awless performance. 
Kraken is sentenced to be terminated and administers his 
own lethal injection, which is, in reality, a powerful sedative.
Growing doubts in his own performance and actions as a 
Judge lead Dredd to question his future and he opts to take 
the Long Walk. Dredd is absent from Mega-City One for 
almost a year, during which he is assaulted by the Sisters 
of Death; Nausea and Phobia. Dredd suffers from amnesia 
during this ordeal but ﬁ nally recovers his memory and returns 
to Mega-City One.
2112
Chief Judge Silver makes Kraken a Judge and uses him to 
replace Dredd, who is wandering the Cursed Earth. Under 
the inﬂ uence of the Sisters of Death, Kraken kidnaps Psi 
Judge Agee and the Sisters use her mind to form a bridge 
to Mega-City One from their own dimension, Deadworld, the 
home of the Dark Judges.
Kraken is forced to free the Dark Judges from dimensional 
limbo and they bring hell to Mega-City One, turning it into the 
Necropolis. Despite the efforts of Dredd and other Judges, 
over sixty million citizens are killed before Agee’s own death 
breaks the bridge between worlds and three of the Dark 
Judges are re-imprisoned in Boing®. Judge Death, however, 
remains free. 
The Necropolis crisis results in Chief Judge Silver’s death 
and McGruder, having returned from the Cursed Earth, re-
assumes the ofﬁ ce.
2113
The Democratic Referendum, established in the wake of 
Necropolis, is sabotaged by conspirators who also want 
to murder Dredd. Judges Dredd and Dekker round up 
conspirators and discover they include Judges Grice and 
DeGaulle. Dredd’s campaign exposes the weaknesses of 
the Democratic Referendum and Mega-City One’s citizens 
overwhelmingly re-elect Justice Department to govern the 
City.
Later that year, Chief Judge Silver, thought to be dead, returns 
in a zombie-like form, explaining that Judge Death had left 
him alive for regular torture. He demands that McGruder 
relinquish control of Justice Department to him but Dredd 
resolves the issue by executing Silver for promoting Kraken 
and giving the Dark Judges a foothold via the Necropolis 
incident.
2114
Sabbat the Necromagus arrives from the year 2178 and sets 
about reanimating the dead all over the world. Billions die 
as several Mega-Cities are completely overrun by zombies 
and the only option is to use nuclear weapons to prevent the 
undead from increasing in strength. Aided by Johnny Alpha, 
a mutant bounty hunter from Sabbat’s time, an elite squad of 
Judges led by Dredd ends the conﬂ ict. 
2115
Chief Judge McGruder instigates the Mechanismo project 
to supplement the dwindling ranks of the Street Judges. 
The project is conducted under extreme secrecy by Tek 
Judge Stich and results in the Mechanismos – robot Judges 
invested with programming that mirrors that of their human 
counterparts. When two units (5 and 8) malfunction and 
run murderously amok, Dredd confronts McGruder and the 
project is put into abeyance – but not abandoned. McGruder 
continues with the project. Unit 5, which has not been 
destroyed, reactivates and escapes into the Mega-City One 
sewers where it remains at liberty, emerging periodically to 

===PAGE 249===
 Macs Database
248
terrorise and kill. This catastrophe of the Mechanismo project 
notwithstanding, McGruder authorises the development 
of Mechanismo Mark IIs, this time under the aegis of Tek 
Judge Quiggley. Quiggley, after a year of work, almost has 
the improved Mecahnismos ready for a second ﬁ eld test 
when Unit 5 re-emerges from the sewer and begins its third 
campaign of murder. Taking personal charge of the search 
for the errant robot, McGruder brings forward the Mk II ﬁ eld 
test and deploys them on the streets, reasoning that the best 
way to anticipate the next move of Unit 5 is to use other 
robots to hunt it.
Dredd, appalled to learn that the Mechanismo Programme 
has continued in secret, demands the Chief Judge’s 
resignation. She refuses, causing lasting friction between the 
Senior and Chief Judge. Resolving to stop the Mechanismo 
Programme, Dredd decides to discredit the Mk II units by 
ﬁ nding Unit Five before they do. Dredd is successful but 
needs to bend the law to bring the Mechanismo project to 
an end.
2116
McGruder resigns for the second time and it is plain that 
she is suffering from dementia. Judge Hadrian Volt becomes 
Chief Judge.
2117-2119
Dredd becomes Sector Chief of the notorious Sector 301, a 
dumping ground for those Judges who lack the moral ﬁ bre 
for street work but, owing to strained resources, cannot 
be dismissed from duty or sentenced to Titan. Dredd 
establishes a task force of Judges to investigate evidence 
of Judge corruption that is discrete from the SJS. Led by 
Judge Galen DeMarco, the task force meets with success 
but is compromised by DeMarco’s affair with her colleague, 
Judge Warren. The Sector 301 clean up establishes the 
involvement of the Frendz Mob in the Justice Department 
corruption and Dredd instigates a harassment campaign 
against them. This results in mass gang warfare against 
the Sector 301 Judges but Dredd prevails and gets the 
Frendz boss on three hundred outstanding parking offences, 
resulting in 25 years cube-time.
2121
Nero Narcos commences his Doomsday Scenario with the 
assistance of Orlok, the East Meg Judge who was responsible 
for instigating Block Mania twenty years earlier. Sabotaged 
Mk II Lawgivers simultaneously self-destruct, bringing havoc 
to Justice Department. Dredd himself is captured by Orlok 
and taken to the exiled East Meg Diktatorat, which is now 
based on the Mediterranean Free State: a huge collection 
of ships docked together in a single compound in the 
Mediterranean Sea. Dredd is placed on trial for war crimes 
and genocide, his trial being televised to the world. Evidence 
given by Orlok establishes East-Meg’s culpability for the 
Apocalypse War and Dredd is released, only to walk into a 
trap established by the Diktatorat to have him murdered. 
Anderson and Dredd escape to Brit-Cit with both Orlok’s 
help and his treachery.
Meanwhile, Mega-City One battles against the Assassinator 
droids of Nero Narcos. Dredd co-ordinates the resistance 
from Brit-Cit and manages to seize control of three strato-
freighters containing Assassinator droids Narcos has based 
in the Cursed Earth. Dredd has these reprogrammed, 
and uses them to retaliate. Narcos begins to suffer heavy 
casualties as the Judges rise up, led by Deputy Chief Judge 
Hershey, and the tide begins to turn. Dredd and his squad 
return to the city to join the ﬁ ght and by the time Narcos 
recognises he is defeated, Dredd’s robots have regained 
control of the city’s nuclear weapons. Narcos’s Doomsday 
option is ended. Narcos is executed by a dozen Judges, and 
Dredd regains control of Mega-City One.
In the wake of the Doomsday Scenario, Chief Judge Volt 
takes his own life. Deputy Chief Judge Hershey becomes 
the new Chief Judge.
2122
A Dredd-clone called Rico (named after Dredd’s late clone-
brother) requests transfer from Texas City to Mega-City One. 
Dredd takes the younger clone under his wing and grants 
Rico full eagle status.
2123
A version of Judge Cal from a parallel dimension leads an army 
of perps against Mega-City One. Cal takes over the Grand 
Hall of Justice, killing hundreds of Judges in the process and 
cruciﬁ es all his prisoners in the street. He is ﬁ nally stopped 
by Dredd and killed (again) with the help of a civilian, Darien 
Kenzie – but only after considerable loss of life.
Ex-Space Corp trooper Armon Gill begins a crusade to 
eliminate citizens who openly criticise Justice Department. 
He is directed by Judge DeKlerk, head of the Special 
Operations Executive. Gill is captured and sentenced to a 
Cursed Earth work camp but Judge DeKlerk’s involvement 
goes undetected.
2124
Orlok the Assassin is recaptured but not before releasing 
a virus that kills hundreds of thousands of Mega-City One 
citizens. He is executed on live vid broadcast the next year.
In the same year, Judge Death again escapes conﬁ nement.

===PAGE 250===
 Macs Database
249

===PAGE 251===
 Macs Database
250
the changes. Their plot is a success and Senior Judge Dan 
Francisco becomes Chief Judge – even though his victory is 
the consequence of a fake assassination attempt.
Running 
Judge Dredd 
Campaigns
The Judge Dredd stories, as told in 2000 AD and its spin-off 
publications, offer excellent templates for crafting rewarding 
Judge Dredd scenarios. The stories can be categorised into 
several types:
One-Off Crimes
Many stories focus on a single crime: from it being committed, 
through its investigation and concluding in the sentencing of 
the perp. The aim of these stories is to show how justice is 
enforced in Mega-City One and how each type of crime has 
an impact on the citizens and the perp himself. Crimes range 
from the mundane (such as littering or speeding) through to 
the truly bizarre, such as bodysnatching or Stookie Glanding. 
Each story is framed differently but the components are 
essentially the same:
• The perp’s motivation for the crime
• The committing of the crime
• The crime’s effects
• The Judge’s involvement
• Resolution and Sentencing
Many crimes are opportunistic, rather than being executed 
according to a plan and although the crimes may be bizarre, 
they tend to focus less on the fantastic elements found in 
Judge Dredd stories and more on the motivation and effects 
on citizens and the city. Not only do these stories serve to 
illustrate a crime, they serve to offer an insight into the mind 
of the perp and how a Judge has to handle the situation.
Such stories are effectively One-Shots – single, self-
contained adventures that can be resolved in one (or two, at 
the most) session of game play. The crime is not elaborate 
or extensive but follows a straight-forward plan:
• The crime is committed
• The Judge investigates
• A chase or stand-off ensues
• Justice is dispensed
This kind of story is an excellent way for Referees to introduce 
the myriad different crimes committed in Mega-City One to 
new Players and, especially, those Players who have little 
2126
The Total War Terrorist group triggers multiple nuclear bombs, 
resulting in the deaths of four million people, in a bid to force 
the Judges out of power. The attempt is counter-productive, 
as the public is appalled at the enormous loss of life which 
was supposedly caused for their bene ﬁ t. Any remaining 
mainstream support for democracy dwindles still further.
2127
Following Total War’s terrorist outrages, hundreds of 
thousands of citizens have been left homeless and live in 
overcrowded, crime-ridden emergency camps. The Half-
Life plague, spread by a treacherous Psi Judge, results in a 
wave of murderous violence that eventually kills one million 
people. The Half-Life plague allows the Sisters of Death to 
launch another attack, with entire blocks being wiped out by 
plagues and poltergeist activity.
2128
Ciudad Barranquilla is in the grip of civil war and Mega-City 
One leads a peacekeeping mission. However this proves to 
be a regime-change ruse, designed to install a new Supreme 
Judge who is under the effective control of the Mega-City 
One Justice Department. 
2129
A dimensional portal opens to the parallel world of Kaluza; 
a dimension composed of dark-matter. The portal allows 
demonic creatures to invade the city, slaughtering whole 
sectors and causing a crime-increasing psychic backlash. 
The assault is halted only when Judges invade Kaluza and 
shut the portal down.
In the same year. thirty city-blocks designed by Findhorn 
Gask reveal themselves to be giant robots, which, once 
activated, rampage through the city, before being convinced 
to stop and turned into a satellite city. 
Also in 2129 the Council of Five rejects Dredd’s proposal 
to relax the mutant ban. Dredd responds with a massive 
crackdown on the city’s Mutant Farm facilities. 
2130
Following more pressure from Dredd, the mutant laws are 
reviewed again and repealed, out of fear that Dredd will resign. 
The change in the law results in widespread rioting by citizens, 
followed by frequent hate crimes against mutant migrants.
2131
The current year for Judge Dredd campaigns. Senior 
Judges, against the mutant rights laws, force a vote to 
replace Hershey as Chief Judge in the hope of undoing 

===PAGE 252===
 Macs Database
251
experience of the Judge Dredd stories and setting. They give the characters excellent exposure to the foibles of perps, a decent 
amount of action and the chance to exercise essential skills and, because Mega-City One is inevitably a violent place, a combat 
of some form.
If you are a Referee new to Judge Dredd, or your Players are new to the setting, it is recommended that the ﬁ rst few game 
sessions take this kind of One-Shot format. It helps to cement in place both the character of the city and the role of the Judges 
without large amounts of background or detail being necessary. The crime in question is the focus; how the Judges solve it and 
deal with the perp being the challenge. As the Players (and you, as Referee) become more familiar with the setting, these One-
Shots do not need to be so frequent, although a good sprinkling of them throughout a campaign reﬂ ects the fact that Judges are 
required to do a daily job of work and that petty crime happens every minute of every day – and has to be dealt with.
Mega-City One Snapshots
Mega-City One snapshots are not necessarily crimes: frequently they are the aftermath of a crime or a focus on the victims of a 
crime. Quite often, a crime results from a law-abiding pursuit and the aim of the story is to illustrate the lives of Mega-City One’s 
citizens and bring to life the tediousness of their existence, against the backdrop of the enormity of the city.
Judges do not need to investigate a crime and arrest a perp but 
they do need to interact with citizens, understand the nature of 
the incident they are involved with and, perhaps, pass some 
form of judgment or instigate some form of help. Dredd, for 
all his stony-faced dedication to the law, frequently involves 
himself in such stories – be they a child’s brain that needs 
implanting into a robot body so that she and her parents 
can enjoy a family life; or simply interviewing the victims 
of a crime to better understand the motives behind it.
The Player Character Judges should be involved 
in these kinds of scenarios too. They do not 
necessarily involve gunﬁ ghts, chases or on-the-
spot sentencing but they do engage Judges 
with the innocent, law abiding public allowing 
them to gain some sympathy with them 
and increase their awareness of the 
consequences of both a crime and 
a Judge’s actions on the general 
public.
Many of these snapshot stories 
are told through the eyes of the 
citizens, rather than from the 
perspective of the Judges, 
which can be hard to achieve 
in a roleplaying game and 
is not necessarily effective. 
However, these low-key, low-
action stories are a good way 
of breaking up the routine 
and allow both Referee 
and characters to become 
involved in a good story. 
Snapshots are very 
much like one-offs but 
can be more complex. 

===PAGE 253===
 Macs Database
252
The focus is on the people affected by the circumstances of 
the story and not necessarily on the crime. Snapshots allow 
Judges to see beyond the criminal tendencies of Mega-City 
One citizens and humanises the Judges (slightly). Snapshots 
can be good ways of introducing regular supporting 
characters or stories that can be used later, in more detailed 
story-arcs or epics, to give the Judges insight or simply to 
lend depth and colour to the campaign.
Snapshots should be used sparingly – perhaps as the 
antidote to a run of One-Shot crimes or in the aftermath of a 
detailed investigation or Epic Storyline. Used sparingly, they 
are effective tools for bringing depth to Judge Dredd games 
and can be especially effective if there are only one or two 
Players involved in the session.
On Patrol
As the name suggests, Judges are out and about – on foot 
or in the saddle – and simply dealing with whatever crimes 
and incidents are strewn in their path. On Patrol stories are 
short, sharp bursts of action allowing Judges to deal with a 
variety of petty crimes quickly or become involved in dealing 
with a major incident that has a simple and fast resolution.
They key to an effective On Patrol story is for the Referee 
to have a series of crimes ready-prepared that can dropped, 
in any order, into the Judges’ path. The Perps section in 
the Crazies, Fatties, Muties and Perps chapter 
offers a random way for determining crime and this can 
be an excellent tool for handling routine patrol scenarios. 
The essence is to have a variety of different crimes and to 
have each resolved quickly before the next is introduced. 
The pace should be fast – so no sooner has one perp been 
cuffed to a holding post than another perp is committing an 
offence across the street. If a series of crimes can be linked 
to a single, triggering incident, then this makes for even more 
fun as the Judges follow a paper-trail of incidents stemming 
from a single (and perhaps innocent) root cause. On Patrol 
scenarios are excellent for unplanned game sessions where 
the Players do not need a great amount of detail and simply 
want to engage in what is called ‘sandbox’ play – that is, just 
getting on with their jobs and exploring as a part of being a 
resident of a place. It helps to have some crimes structured 
before play begins but with experience Referees will learn 
how to produce crimes and handle them, on the ﬂ y.
On Patrol scenarios should therefore aim for diversity and 
fast resolution (so no convoluted gun battles), usually with 
a whimsical feel or heavy dose of irony to accompany the 
proceedings. The On Patrol stories found in the Judge Dredd 
saga are typically blackly humorous and illustrate both the 
absurdity of Mega-City One and the absurdity of the justice 
system. A good way on introducing light-relief and great for 
exercising the dispensation of instant justice.
Detailed Cases
Detailed case stories revolve around the in-depth study of 
a crime. From the Judges’ perspective they have no idea 
as to the perp and/or the motive and must use deduction, 
questioning, evidence and other investigational techniques 
to identify who committed he crime and why, then drive the 
case towards resolution.
Detailed case stories do not need to involve complex motives 
or bizarre crimes; indeed, many such cases in the Judge 
Dredd saga focus on straight-forward crimes committed 
for understandable, straight-forward motives. Examples of 
Detailed cases:
• Crimes of Passion
• Peeping
• Revenge
• Carefully planned heists and robberies
• Meticulously planned murders
• Missing Persons
• Blackmail/Extortion
• Fraud
But the list is perhaps endless. Any crime, with any motive, 
can form the basis of a detailed case.
A detailed case investigation should take several sessions of 
play to conclude and should include the following elements:
• Response to the initial crime report
• Dealing with witnesses, victims and the body (if one is 
present)
• Crime Scene Investigation, calling in Med, Tek and Psi 
support as needed
• Taking witness statements, with routine lie detector tests
• Interrogating potential suspects – sometimes discreetly; 
sometimes heavy-handed
• Following-up leads
• Using informers
• Identifying the suspect or shortlist of suspects
• Veriﬁ cation of the suspect(s)
• Making the arrest
• Sentencing
In most cases of this type, the perp has carefully planned the 
crime in advance. He need not be a criminal genius of the PJ 
Maybe variety but smart enough to know that forensics will 

===PAGE 254===
 Macs Database
253
provide valuable clues and acting suspiciously, and without 
solid alibis, will quickly lead to the presumption of guilt. 
Perps are therefore not necessarily opportunists; or if they 
are they have kept their cool and made as clean a getaway 
as possible, taking valuable evidence away with them or 
destroying it.
Judges need to employ a variety of techniques to solve 
a detailed case: investigation and attention to detail are 
watchwords. Witness statements need to be checked, 
rechecked and cross-referenced. Investigation takes time 
and may offer valuable clues or complete red herrings. 
Casual witnesses may need to be tracked-down and this can 
be time-consuming. A team of Judges can, of course, split 
their efforts but this can make it dif ﬁ cult for a Referee – and 
the group – to keep everyone’s interest: helpfully, Judges in 
the Judge Dredd stories are often shown working together 
frequently and as a team, so the Player Characters should 
be encouraged to follow that precedent.
The biggest challenge is for the Referee in creating a case 
that is complex, challenging but also rational in its structure. 
Detailed cases need careful preparation and the motives 
and experiences of Non-Player Characters established in 
advance and carry a mixture of both fact and irrelevance to 
ensure the Judges have to work for their results. Detailed 
cases are therefore harder to run and manage than the 
scenario types already discussed and will therefore be 
infrequent affairs but are nonetheless rewarding.
One thing to bear in mind is simplicity. Most detailed cases 
in Judge Dredd are not especially complex: detailed, yes but 
the twists and turns found in popular detective drama are 
curiously absent and this is a good thing. A simple case, with 
detailed and well-drawn characters, evidence and so forth, is 
far easier to manage than a complex, convoluted case with 
multiple red herrings, perpetrators and obscure motives. 
Complex cases are dif ﬁ cult to structure and errors easy 
to make. Keep the nature of the case straightforward and 
invest time in providing the detail. Fiendishly clever crimes 
are ﬁ ne of course but take far longer to structure and may 
even be difﬁ cult to present during the game session.
Epic Story-Arcs
Judge Dredd specialises in, and excels at, epic storylines. 
The Cursed Earth, Judge Cal, The Judge Child, Apocalypse 
War, Necropolis, The Pit and the Doomsday Scenario are 
examples of ambitious storytelling at its best. The themes 
in common:
• A city-wide or global threat
• One or more major, highly powerful villains with grand 
schemes in mind
• Recurring arch-enemies (The Dark Judges, Orlok, Cal 
and so forth)
• Treachery and corruption in high places
• Weaknesses of top-level judgment
• Incursion of advanced or supernatural forces
• Dire threats to the Justice Departments
• High body counts
• Destruction on a vast scale
• A rebellion or ﬁ ght-back against dreadful odds
• Ingenious solutions that save the day
• An aftermath that changes the way Mega-City One 
progresses
By their very nature, Epic scenarios take many sessions to 
complete – just as the stories in 2000 AD take weeks or 
months (usually months) to resolve. This means careful 
planning on the part of the Referee – but it also requires 
ambition. An epic storyline is the time to introduce as much 
bizarreness and adversity as possible; it is time for those 
grand gestures and uber-villains to be wheeled-out centre 
stage and your Judges be given a shot at the title.
However, these epic tales have a certain structure that is 
worth noting:
Slow-Burn Opening
With a few exceptions, most Judge Dredd epics begin with a 
slow-burn opening. An innocuous, routine case either builds 
into, or contributes to, the grand themes of the epic. The 
Apocalypse War, for example, begins with Block Mania. 
Necropolis builds with Dredd’s resignation and the Dead 
Man story spin-off. These slow-burn openings can be One-
Shots, Snapshots or Detailed Cases that, at ﬁ rst glance, are 
done and dusted once the arrest is made. However, events 
within those stories act as triggers for further events that 
build, gradually, into the theme of the epic story.
Slow Villain Reveal
The villains behind the epic are rarely revealed in the 
beginning. Their involvement develops over time. Orlok, for 
example, is not revealed as the Block Mania instigator for 
several episodes and War Marshall Kazan, the murderous 
leader of the Sov Bloc forces in the Apocalypse War, does 
not make an appearance until halfway into the story. Nero 
Narcos, in the Doomsday Scenario, appears towards the end 
of the story. It is therefore not necessary to have the major 

===PAGE 255===
 Macs Database
254
• Allow any one skill roll to be re-rolled – either the 
character’s or an opponent’s: however, only one re-
roll per situation is allowed and the Hero Point is spent 
regardless of the outcome.
• Bring a character back from the brink of death or 
suspend immediate death so the Judge can accomplish 
a drastic action (a Judge, peppered with automatic 
ﬁ re, manages to crawl towards the nuke and switch it 
off, even though, using the rules, he would have died 
metres before reaching it. The Judge expires heroically 
as the city is saved).
• Gain ONE particular plot insight, if the Referee deems it 
appropriate.
• Recall, remember or stumble upon an obscure clue, 
piece of knowledge or equipment that will help progress 
the plot.
If Hero Points are used (and look at any Judge Dredd 
story and you will see examples of how, if the story was a 
roleplaying game, Hero Points would have been used), then 
the Referee is always, always the arbiter on when, where 
and how. Players should not use Hero Points as ‘Get Out of 
Jail Free’ cards, nor insist on using Hero Points to mitigate 
bad or poor decisions. There is also no right to Hero Points: 
they are assigned at the Referee’s discretion and may last 
for one scenario or game session only.
When Hero Points are used, it is recommended that 
characters receive no more than 3 Hero Points for that epic 
storyline. When it is over, Hero Points, if any remain, ﬁ zzle 
into thin air and do not carry over into the more mundane 
stories of the campaign (unless the Referee decides 
otherwise and wants to use Hero Points on an extended 
basis). Judge Dredd is heroic but it is also gritty; use of Hero 
Points should be measured and used to drive particular story 
needs – not as a magical solution for all conditions.
Fantastic Peril
Many of the best epic stories in Judge Dredd have, as 
their basis parallel dimensions, time-travel and apocalyptic 
science that, if subjected to the microscope of reason and 
hard science, would fall apart instantly. Not so in epic stories: 
this is the place for the outlandish and the inexplicable. Plot 
devices do not need or require rational explanations or real-
life underpinnings. Top Secret Justice Department mega-
weapons are unveiled as plot devices and do not need to 
have been hinted at or explicitly stated in earlier stories 
or, indeed, in this rulebook. Time and dimensional travel 
works – but you do not need to explain how. Even fantasy 
concepts such as magic and sorcery can be fairly used in 
epic stories and do not need to be given a rational foothold 
villain front and centre from the word go. More important is 
their inﬂ uence, exerted through agents and proxies, which 
gradually focuses on the main villain himself and leads 
the characters into one or more confrontations with him at 
suitably dramatic points.
Action Focus
The epic Dredd stories focus less on investigation and more 
on action and adversity. This is a time for Judges to be 
physically tested and challenged. Combats are frequent and 
brutal; foes are tough and injuries common. Body counts are 
high, escalating as the Judges ﬁ ght their way to the source 
of the evil and attempt to save their city. Investigation and 
use of the little grey cells should not be ignored though – 
especially in the early stages of the story. But once the main 
plot is revealed and the Judges sure of the nature and extent 
of the threat, guns should blaze and buildings should fall.
The Judges Will Fail
Classic storytelling techniques always have the protagonist 
suffer a major defeat or drawback, only to pick himself up 
and overcome the odds to reach a satisfying climax. Judge 
Dredd epics are no exception. Dredd himself has been 
mortally wounded, blinded, irradiated, turned into a werewolf, 
zombieﬁ ed, Block Mania infected and even driven to the 
brink of despair. Despite his superhuman capabilities, the 
ﬂ awed human beneath; vulnerable and sometimes lacking 
in conﬁ dence, is exposed. Dredd has to ﬁ ght back and 
overcome these adversities to drive the epic to its conclusion. 
The Judges in your epic stories should be placed in similar 
positions. What this means is that, as a Referee, you should 
not ﬂ inch from allowing harsh decisions to place the Judges 
in serious peril – and even close to death – but they should 
also be given the opportunity to recover and ﬁ ght back, albeit 
encumbered by their hardships.
Note that Judges should not be immune to death. Poor 
decisions should be rewarded with harsh consequences; 
stupid actions with a common-sense return. Similarly, self-
sacriﬁ ce to advance the plot or increase the party’s chances 
of success should be nobly acknowledged and the Player 
immediately brought-back into play with a supporting 
character. But Judges are notoriously unsentimental and 
their training and dedication means that self-sacriﬁ ce, where 
no other option exists, is expected and taken.
Hero Points
Referees may wish to consider giving Player Character 
Judges a pool of Hero Points for use in epic stories or at 
the most difﬁ cult junctures. Hero Points work in the following 
ways:

===PAGE 256===
 Macs Database
255
for their use. Dredd frequently encounters the supernatural 
or irrational science in the course of his epic adventures; so 
should your Judges. Dredd rarely analyses them or seeks an 
explanation: he dismisses them as weird and gets on with 
it. So should your Judges. The intent of an epic story is fun, 
peril and adventure in a heroic comic-book mould. Strange, 
bizarre and fantastic stuff works and does not feel a need 
to explain how.
Let Mega-City One Have It Big 
Time
By rights, Mega-City One should be uninhabitable, given the 
nuclear, biological and supernatural attacks it has faced over 
its history. Entire regions have been blasted into oblivion 
only to be speedily rebuilt afterwards. Whole city blocks 
explode and millions die; but the city carries on. The reason 
is that Mega-City One is a character every bit as important 
as Judge Dredd – and your Judges. So, in an epic story-
arc, whole sectors can, with license, be nuked, submerged, 
transported to the domain of the Dark Judges, immolated, 
infested, contaminated and smashed to smithereens by alien 
weapons or giant, sentient robots. It is almost true to say that 
an epic storyline is not complete without such wide-screen, 
hi-deﬁ nition destruction – and so it should be in your own epic 
Dredd’s Statistics
Although game statistics for some of the famous 
perps have been provided, there are deliberately 
none for Judge Dredd. The reason for this is simple: 
Dredd is bigger than any game system can easily 
encompass. His use in the game should always 
be under the Referee’s control and his statistics, 
relative to the characters’, are immaterial. If Dredd 
enters regular play, he becomes the focal point 
for the game and his game statistics are so far in 
advance of Player Character Judges that it is unfair 
to offer them. Dredd is a symbol of ultimate justice; 
that helmet stays on for a reason.
Given his physical and intellectual prowess, Dredd 
can be assumed to have a minimum level of 6 in all 
skills Judges routinely use in their duties. He is skilled 
in all Street Judge Special Techniques. He can 
be wounded and knocked down but no foe has 
managed to kill him yet. He is human and 
mortal but as a symbol he is indestructible.
stories. At the end, those areas will stay ruined until rebuilt. 
This means Judges may have to relocate or get involved in 
the rebuilding. Inevitably, Mega-City One will prevail and rise 
from the ashes, its spirit and idiosyncrasies intact. Citizens 
will go back to their humdrum lives and Judges will return 
to their patrols to dole-out cube-time to litterers, slowsters, 
taps and Umpty Baggers – just as they did before the epic 
events occured.
Locations & 
Maps
In a city where every city block contains pretty much 
everything a citizen needs throughout his whole life, 
Players need not necessarily have to remember, or even 
be told to begin with, the location of the nearest kneepad 
stall or munce burger joint. You can simply assume they 
readily ﬁ nd a suitable place and will take just a few minutes 
to get there, whether by vehicle or on foot. 
When they start interacting with the citizens of Mega-City 
One and begin forming relationships with serious Non-
Player Characters, you will ﬁ nd they naturally gravitate to 
speciﬁ c locations without too much work on your part. Do 
not try mapping Mega-City One. Do not even try mapping 
a complete sector. People have tried it before and have 
gone insane. The multi-levelled nature of the city blocks 
and spaghetti-like road system is extremely complex 
and would require a high-powered computer to achieve 
success. For the purposes of the game itself, such maps 
are also irrelevant. You can safely assume that any city 
block is connected, at many levels, to its neighbours and to 
every block within several miles by zoom tubes, skedways, 
pedways and hoverports. Any citizen can reach pretty 
much anywhere in the city, given enough time. Judges 
on Lawmasters will be able to travel between blocks 
within just a few minutes. Though hideously complex, the 
transportation systems of Mega-City One work to a large 
extent. 
Instead, maps should only really become necessary when 
you come to focus on the actions of the Players. There is 
no need to map every level of a hundred-storey block but 
a diagram of the level the Players are travelling to, and 
a map of the apartment they are visiting, will likely prove 
beneﬁ cial. You do not need to plot every connecting road 
within three miles as the Players close in on a group of 
wreckers but the underpass in which they have halted 
trafﬁ c may be well served by a complete map showing their 
positions and those of overturned and burnt out vehicles. 
In short, when describing what Mega-City One is actually 

===PAGE 257===
 Macs Database
256
like, simply detail what you need to and leave the rest to 
your imagination and that of your Players. Anything else 
will likely be super ﬂ uous.
The Big Name 
Cast
Every so often it is fun to have the big names from the Dredd 
saga wander into a story; Dredd himself, Anderson, Hershey, 
Giant and so on. Remember that Mega-City One is a huge 
place and so the chances for your Judges to encounter such 
greats (unless based in Sector 44, which is where Dredd and 
company tend to operate) will be rare, but not impossible. 
The Judges may be called by Dredd as back-up or may ﬁ nd 
him backing them up on occasion, or may ﬁ nd the likes 
of Anderson providing detailed psionic support when the 
Judges need someone of a suf ﬁ ciently high level of psionic 
experience and no one else will do.
Referees should bring the named characters into scenarios 
every once in a while. It establishes continuity with the 
wider saga, exposes characters to the legends of Justice 
Department and establishes links that may be useful and 
important for later scenarios – especially epic story arcs. 
However, resist the temptation to have Dredd roar-in on 
his Lawmaster just to save the characters’ backsides; or 
for characters to summon Dredd every other day simply 
because they cannot be bothered solving something for 
themselves. Not only is Dredd busy, he will not be happy and 
will most likely deny frequent (and even infrequent) requests 
from junior Judges. Relying on Dredd too much as a deus-
ex machina will simply earn the Judges Dredd’s scorn and 
result in an of ﬁ cial reprimand and competency assessment 
by their Sector Chief when Dredd makes his feelings felt.
Replaying 
the Classics
Part of the fun of a roleplaying game based on a popular 
body of ﬁ ction is the opportunity to replay and perhaps alter 
the stories from the saga. Judge Dredd is no different and 
your Judges can have the opportunity to ﬁ ght in the Robot 
Wars, defy Cal (or perhaps side with him?), trek across the 
Cursed Earth, hunt for the Judge Child (and perhaps bring 
him back), arrest PJ Maybe and Chopper and face-off against 
Judge Death. The default year for Judge Dredd campaigns 
is 2131 but there is nothing to prevent you from setting your 
campaign at any point in Judge Dredd’s timeline and using 
your Judges as the focus for Dredd’s adventures and cases. 
Indeed, a great deal of fun can be had through changing 
how those adventures progress and letting the characters 
develop the famous storylines from their perspectives – and 
thus altering future events to create a completely unique 
version of Mega-City One. Perhaps Dredd does not exist; 
perhaps he perishes in the Cursed Earth or when shot by 
Judge Slocum during Cal’s reign of terror. The opportunity 
and decision is yours.
If you choose to remain faithful to the canon, then the 
characters could be assisting Dredd or acting in his place, 
but following events largely as they are resolved in the 
stories. The timeline at the start of this chapter places key 
events (although not all of them) in chronological order so 
Referees can see what future events will be inﬂ uenced if the 
campaign replays the classic stories.
Or, perhaps your Mega-City One is a parallel version of that 
found in 2000 AD. There is certainly a precedent for this, as 
Judge Cal’s return proves. In a parallel Mega-City One Dredd 
might be a routine Street Judge, head of SJS, Chief Judge 
or even serving a stretch on Titan for excessive brutality. 
Perhaps Cal or the Mutant or the Sisters of Death rule Mega-
City One. Did the Apocalypse War take place? Did East-Meg 
One win? All these ‘what if’ scenarios can be an excellent 
way of developing a very similar Dredd campaign without 
having to stick rigidly to the canon.
Crossovers 
and Mega 
Teams
Dredd has enjoyed crossover stories with several 2000 AD 
characters in the past and several older 2000 AD stories (Flesh 
and Harlem Heroes, to name two) are precursors to Dredd’s 
saga. Most notably Dredd has teamed-up with Johnny Alpha 
(Strontium Dog) and has encountered various heroes from 
non-Rebellion titles – including a certain caped crusader.
Team-ups and crossovers are quite welcome in Judge Dredd 
campaigns and the Strontium Dog game can be considered 
a sister game to Judge Dredd (and will use similar concepts 
found in these pages). The Referee is encouraged to use 
these crossovers but to do so sparingly to preserve their 
effect.


===PAGE 258===
www.www.
mongoosemongoose
 publishing publishing.com.com


===PAGE 259===
 Sector 13
258
Location
Sector 13 is in the old state of New Jersey, bordering the 
island of Manhattan and the old conurb of New York. Heavily 
devastated during the Apocalypse War, it has seen some of 
the most vigorous rebuilding projects anywhere on Mega-
City One although there are still many no-go areas that are 
either too dangerous because of the instability of the ruined 
buildings, rad-pockets or because the criminal gangs have 
managed to impose street-rule.
The sector is bifurcated by the north/south axis of the 
Superslab and its eastern border (with Sector 14) is marked 
by the old Delaware River. The river, dreadfully polluted, 
has been sealed over by almost a century of Mega-City 
Building work; however the Apocalypse War uncovered 
some stretches of the dark, festering, Black Atlantic-bound 
waterway and these have yet to be recovered. The Delaware 
is nicknamed the Big Greasy by Sector 13 citizens and is 
known to be infested with rad-rats, mutated ﬁ sh, lizards and 
other unpleasantness.
Sector 13 is also close to the Eustace Fargo Spaceport, 
which makes it one of the ﬁ rst ports of call for returning 
spacers, alien tourists and disembarking passengers – as 
well as a retreat for perps looking to get off-world ASAP.
Sector 13 At A 
Glance
Population: 1.5 million
Major Roads: Mega-City One Superslab (90km length)
  Buddy Abbott Megway
  Aaron Burr Megway
  Davey Copperﬁ  eld Megway
  Whitney Houston Mega-Circular
  Norm Mailer Megway Intersect
  Dionne Warwick Xpress Tunnel
  Alﬁ  e Stieglitz Skedway
  Phil Roth Overzoom
Notable Industries: Nervotek Chemicals; Randellson 
Pharmaceuticals; MC-1 Chemdustries; Gud-U-Feel 
Pharmacology; Sensen Electronics; Videoshak Consumer 
Durables; Van-Dan-Meer Industrial Supplies; Mikrodyne 
Engineering.
Notable City 
Blocks:
Sector 13 has seven major city blocks and around a dozen 
smaller blocks (conapts, luxy-blocks, crock-blocks and so 
on). The seven city blocks are:
Buzz Aldrin Block
Population: 35,000
Block Assembly: BABS
Allies:  Jimmy Gandol ﬁ ni
Enemies: Dotty Parker
Fashioned in the shape of the ancient Saturn V moon rocket 
(but a taller, wider, more bloated version of it), Buzz Aldrin 
block mistakenly believes itself to be foremost of all the 
Sector 13 blocks purely due to the fact that the man it is 
named for was one of the ﬁ rst men to visit the Moon and is 
thus a national hero. Clearly such an auspicious individual is 
watching over a city block named for him and so the Buzzers 
consider themselves superior, in just about every respect, to 
the other six blocks.
Naturally enough this causes constant tension and 
resentment. In the Block Mania before the Apocalypse 
War, Buzz Aldrin block took-on all six of the other city 
blocks simultaneously. Unsurprisingly, it came-off the worst, 
especially against the vindictive dirty tricks of Dotty Parker 
block but the Block Mania defeat has done nothing to dent 
the Buzzers’ arrogance. The block likes to brag that at least 
it had the guts to take-on all comers alone and it took six 
– count ‘em, SIX – other blocks to bring it down.
Buzz Aldrin block is close to Dotty Parker and Jimmy 
Gandolﬁ ni blocks. Its natural enemy is Dotty Parker and the 
last full-scale Block War (which resulted in 5,000 arrests 
and 800 dead, just in Buzz Aldrin alone) was ﬁ ve years 
ago. Dotty Parker came off the worst in that conﬂ ict, with six 
luxury ﬂ oors wiped-out completely by a baby tactical nuke the 
Buzzers’ Citi-Def procured from somewhere. The bitterness 
still lingers between the two blocks but Buzz Aldrin block 
has been careful to display its co-operative credentials in 
recent years as it does not want heavy Justice Department 
reprisals lodging against it.

===PAGE 260===
 Sector 13
259
Relations between Buzz Aldrin and Jimmy Gandolﬁ ni blocks 
are cordial – almost friendly; but that is likely because Jimmy 
Gandolﬁ ni block has had its own spats with Dotty Parker in 
the past couple of years and because Buzz Aldrin needs all 
the support it can get.
The block is controlled by the BABS – Buzz Aldrin Block 
Syndicate, a bunch of semi-insane, petty power brokers who 
self-righteously believe they understand the will of the block’s 
35,000 citizens. although if truth be told they do not even 
understand how to secure their own kneepads. The BABS 
are all wealthy (occupying ﬂ oors AD to AA), patronising and 
hopelessly misguided. They operate under the impression 
that wealth and status equate to wisdom and political 
acuity; unfortunately, they have had considerable success 
in conveying that impression to the block’s citizens through 
the rather cunning machinations of the BABS spin doctor, 
Spiral J Ague, the silver-tongued spokesman for the group 
and all-round creep. Through deft rumour-mongering Ague 
has convinced most residents of how much BABS have the 
block’s interests at heart and how Dotty Parker block is the 
root cause of any woes the Buzzers might be suffering. His 
daily vid show, broadcast over the block’s internal newscast 
service, is called ‘Your Pal Spiral’ and he patronises the 
Buzz Aldrin populace daily with stories about the untiring 
efforts of BABS members on Buzzer citizens’ behalf. The 
show gains record viewing ﬁ gures but only because all other 
programming is blocked for the two hours ‘Your Pal Spiral’ 
lasts. Unbeknown to the members of BABS and the rest of 
the block, Spiral J Ague is a serial peeper with a vast array of 
listening devices and cameras planted throughout the block. 
He has a secret listening station in the sub-levels of the 
block where he goes to catch-up on his favourite recordings 
of the rich, famous and scandalous – all to feed his prime-
time show.
Jon Bon Jovi Block
Population: 42,000
Block Assembly: Lost Highwaymen
Allies:  Zeb Pike
Enemies: Bruce Springsteen
One of the two ‘Rock Blocks’ (the other being Bruce 
Springsteen block), Jon Bon Jovi (or JBJ) block is enthralled 
to the legend that was the 20
th Century’s foremost rock-god-
superstar, Jon Bon Jovi who, legend says, was born and 
raised in the old city that lies beneath JBJ’s foundations (a 
pack of complete lies but who’s to argue?).
JBJ block is stuck in a groove. The holy music of Jon Bon 
Jovi is pumped through every corridor, plaza and apartment 
ﬂ oor in the block, in a never-ending loop. Images of the Great 
Man himself are everywhere and, hanging in pride of place 
in Jonny B Plaza, encased in transparasteen, is Jonny B’s 
six string, once touched by the Great Man’s own hand and 
the most prized possession of the block.
Hated enemy of JBJ is Bruce Springsteen block, which 
claims that Bruce, not Jon, is the REAL god of rock and 
continually point out that, when alive, Brucie was known as 
The Boss, thereby sealing his credentials. JBJ refutes this, 
pointing out that JBJ inspired billions with his hairstyle and 
single-handedly brought about world peace with his iconic 
song ‘Keep The Faith’ (JBJ’s block anthem). The most 
fanatical residents of JBJ – which is to say, most of them 
– affect versions of Jon’s hairstyle; the bigger, shaggier 
and longer the better. Others wear trademark synthi-leather 
pants, synthi-denim waistcoats and cowboy hats. Big hair 
and hats are in; kneepads and pudding-bowl haircuts are 
out. At least, in JBJ block. The hatred between JBJ and 
Springsteen is formidable, especially as the two blocks face 
each other over E Street Plaza and the two blocks enjoy 
sporadic Block Wars fought not with guns but with their 
respective rock god’s songs, played at mega volume from 
specially designed external loudspeakers. That is, until the 
Judges serve a noise-abatement order, arrests are made 
and all goes quiet until the next time.
The block assembly is known as the Lost Highwaymen; 
those who are the most devout of the Bonjovites (as the 
cult of Jon Bon Jovi calls itself) and they call for holy rock 
war against all ‘false’ rock and the kind of tripe preferred 
by the Springsteen blockers. The Lost Highwaymen are 
a laid-back, slow drawling crowd with the biggest hair 
and highest Stetsons in the whole block. Reasonably 
democratic, occasionally concerned with wider affairs, the 
Lost Highwaymen are led by High Priest Ricardo Sambora 
(real name: Gurney Felps) and his wife Reeta. The two are 
indistinguishable as they wear their hair in identical, shaggy, 
Jonny styles and wear identical waistcoats, pants, chaps and 
hats. The two care only to see the Great Man honoured and 
his music live forever. Just like them. Both are Stookie Gland 
users obtaining their supplies from the Stookie Glanders in 
Jimmy Gandolﬁ ni block, plundering the block’s ﬁ nances to 
fund their addiction.
Beholden to Ricardo and Reeta is the Slippery ‘n’ Wet juve 
gang, which seeks to control the lower levels of the block 
and the E Street Plaza. The gang numbers some 500 juves 
and membership is dependent on every member knowing 
every lyric to every Jon song ever written (not hard, given the 
24/7 air-time his recordings get). Unlike Ricardo and Reeta, 
the Slipperies are a violent bunch of juvenile sociopaths who 
are desperate for a decent, old-fashioned, guns and missiles 
Block War with their enemies, the E Street Gang, over in 
Springsteen. The gang leader, Teeko Tortez, did ﬁ ve in the 

===PAGE 261===
 Sector 13
260
juve cubes for aggravated assault and emerged with near 
hero-status. He watches Ricardo and Reeta with interest, 
suspecting they have something to hide and intending to use 
it, one day, to his advantage.
Lloyd H Conover Block
Population: 38,000
Block Assembly: LHC Block Rep Committee
Allies:  None
Enemies: Jimmy Gandol ﬁ ni
Lloyd H Conover block has the dubious reputation of having 
the lowest crime rate in the whole of Sector 13; dubious, 
because, as everyone in Sector 13 knows, everyone in LHC 
is an inveterate liar. Street gossip has it that LHC block lies 
about everything: it has the wealthiest citizens (disputed by 
Dotty Parker), it has the biggest dramarena (Springsteen’s is 
bigger and has a better PA), it has the highest employment 
(nope; Gandol ﬁ ni’s is a staggering 1.5% – double LHC’s) 
and it was the winner of the Block War it fought against 
Dotty Parker (so how come Judges arrested more LHC 
combatants than Dotty’s?). Lies. LHC residents perpetrate 
them every time they open their mouths.
There is no doubting that LHC has one thing that is undisputed: 
the highest rate of Justice Department sanctioned snitchers 
and peepers. Justice Department relies on LHC for around 
5% of its tip-offs and there is an entire ﬂ oor (level C) that 
consists of residents who do nothing all day but train 
telescopes, monoculars and bugs on the streets and plaza 
surrounding their block and snitch to the Sector House to 
their heart’s content.
Consequently, Jimmy Gandol ﬁ ni block hates LHC with a 
vengeance. Everyone in Sector 13 dislikes Buzz Aldrin’s 
arrogance but at least it has the guts to admit what it is 
and stands up for itself. LHC, on the other hand, skulks 
and snitches. And, because much of that snitching impacts 
on Gandolﬁ ni’s business interests, LHC is hated by Jimmy 
G with unbridled passion. Block war between LHC and 
Gandolﬁ ni has been threatened for a long time but its an 
open secret that a war between the two would bring down 
the Judges harder on Gandolﬁ ni and, for a variety of reasons, 
Gandolﬁ ni does not want Justice Department Crime Blitzing 
its apartments. So Block War between LHC and Gandol ﬁ ni 
remains a hotly anticipated rumour, rather than becoming a 
reality.
Head of LHC’s Block Rep Committee is ‘Justice’ Radley 
Paglett. Paglett was expelled from the Academy of Justice in 
his ﬁ nal term for cowardice during an Applied Violence study 
project but he has embellished his history to make out that 
he graduated to Full Eagle and was given an honourable 
discharge after being seriously wounded foiling a heist in 
Sector 97. He plays heavily on his training and knowledge as 
a Judge and stops just short of running a jimping charge. He 
considers it his duty to assist the Sector House in keeping 
Sector 13 clean and this is why he has managed to turn his 
block into a band of informants. The rest of Block Committee 
is formed of like-minded citizens who lament the levels of 
crime in their Sector. All of them enjoy the power and prestige 
snitching to the Sector House has brought them: LHC enjoys 
its own Judge patrol and numerous civic awards grace the 
walls of the mall thoroughfares citing LHC’s co-operation in 
ending one racket or another.
But LHC has its own dirty little secrets. Gandolﬁ ni block has 
inﬁ ltrated LHC with its own wise guys and they snitch on 
the snitchers – ensuring Gandol ﬁ ni stays one step ahead 
of the game. It has its own people in the LHC juve gang, 
the Orange Boys, and they have been pushing the gang’s 
boundaries steadily and craftily for a couple of years, urging 
them on to ever greater offences. Justice Radley Paglett 
would clamp down on the Orange boys if his own, beloved 
son (rejected by the Academy of Justice) were not running 
with them. And so the LHC Block Rep Committee turns a 
blind eye to the gang’s scrawling, tapping and other, petty 
crimes, because although snitching is LHC’s business, one 
does not snitch on one’s own: a maxim Gandolﬁ ni is looking 
to seriously exploit when the time is right.
Jimmy Gandolfini Block
Population: 27,000
Block Assembly: JG Choir Assembly
Allies:  Buzz Aldrin
Enemies: Lloyd H Conover
The real rotten apple in the Sector 13 barrel, Jimmy Gandolﬁ ni 
is run by the Contralto Crew, the sector’s largest criminal 
gang. At the head of the crew is Max Contralto, overweight, 
lugubrious but with a sharp brain and a history of violence. 
Max is smart; just as his predecessors, Junior, Angio, Luigi 
and Antonelli were smart. The Crew has ensured that all 
its rackets, scams and crimes are insulated from the block 
through elaborate, painstakingly crafted shell companies, 
front organisations (who do ‘charitable works’, sometimes 
with las-cutters) and well-placed bribes. The Judges know 
the Contraltos are rotten; but there is insufﬁ cient evidence to 
pull-down the head men – Max and his cousins (and capos) 
Paulie, Stevie, Gus and Kris.
The Contraltos ensure that Jimmy Gandol ﬁ ni block works: 
both in terms of efﬁ ciency and in terms of employment. The 
Crew runs the labour centres for Eustace Fargo spaceport 
and around 400 of the spaceport’s human workers are 
from Gandol ﬁ ni. These lucky citizens therefore serve the 

===PAGE 262===
 Sector 13
261
Crew’s interests at the spaceport, assisting in rackets like 
perp running, chump-dumping, Stookie Glanding, arms 
importation, illegal substance importation and all manner of 
other crimes that get lost in the morass of a busy, inefﬁ cient, 
spaceport hub. In terms of ef ﬁ ciency, Gandol ﬁ ni shuns 
robots and uses human staff to do the routine maintenance, 
again, buying-in favours for the Crew but ensuring that the 
block has no need to attract outside attention and municipal 
repair teams, like the other blocks. Jimmy Gandolﬁ ni block is 
well run, clean, tidy and as corrupt as hell.
Everyone in Gandol ﬁ ni lives in fear of Max Contralto and 
his Crew but respect his business methods. Petty crime of 
the type found in the other blocks is low – the Crew sees to 
that through beating the spug out of any upstart juve who 
thinks he can take advantage. Max redistributes his pro ﬁ ts 
occasionally to supplement welfare payments. Only last 
year, young Donny Osmosis, known for his wonderful singing 
voice, was sponsored by Max to the tune of Cr. 1.5 million at 
the suave Mega Academy of Music and Dance. Donny will 
go on to be a major singing star and he will owe it all to his 
Uncle Max. Gee, Max Contralto has a heart of gold!
The ﬂ y in the ointment is Lloyd H Conover block. Liars 
and informants, LHC is constantly trying to dig the dirt on 
Contralto’s extensive business interests. The Judges bust a 
racket every now an again and send some Crew employees 
to the cubes for a spell and it is all down to LHC sticking its 
nose into things that do not concern it. The Crew lets these 
little busts happen; it diverts attention from the big, money 
spinning rackets like Stookie Glanding and perp running. It 
lets the Sector House believe it has the Contraltos under 
control but really it has nothing of the sort. The network of 
interests, fronts, shell companies and so on means that 
unravelling the Contralto crime empire will take years and 
can be slowed down considerably through the appeals 
process. The legal ﬁ rm (based in Gandol ﬁ ni obviously but 
with branches across the sector) of Hagen, Petrocelli 
and Daaz represents the Contraltos and is highly effective 
at stymieing the wheels of justice. Thus, Max Contralto gets 
away with it.
But there is something else too. Something only the Contralto 
heads know and one other person. During the Apocalypse 
War, when the East-Meg troops invaded Sector 13, the 
Contraltos were amongst the ﬁ rst to shake-off Block Mania 
and ﬁ ght back against the invader. Contralto Crew foot 
soldiers stood side by side with the Judges of Sector 13 and 
fought the Sov Bloc invaders as ﬁ ercely as they could. Sector 
13 held out because of the Contraltos. Leading the Justice 
Department resistance at the time was Judge Hal DiMaggio. 
Junior Contralto headed the crew back then and he saved 
DiMaggio’s life. DiMaggio never forgot that; and so, when 
he became Sector Chief of 13, he deliberately decided to go 
easier on Gandol ﬁ ni block than another Sector Chief might 
have done. Max Contralto keeps this unspoken bond, this 

===PAGE 263===
 Sector 13
262
debt of honour, a secret from everyone save those who have 
a right to know. He does not, exactly, have Chief DiMaggio 
in his pocket but there is an in ﬂ uence there; something that 
works between Gandolﬁ ni and the Justice Department.
LHC can snitch all it wants. Sure, Contralto interests will 
get busted and men will go down; but Max has a Sector 
Chief’s leniency on his side – and that is worth keeping silent 
about.
Dotty Parker Block
Population: 50,000
Block Assembly: DP Representatives Forum
Allies:  Bruce Springsteen
Enemies: Buzz Aldrin
An old, proud block, resembling a malformed gherkin atop a 
slice of lumpy rye bread, Dotty Parker is the most populous 
of the Sector 13 blocks and every bit as aloof as its enemy, 
Buzz Aldrin. In most respects, Dotty Parker is an average 
city block: over-populated, under-employed, over-zealous 
and ﬁ lled with a sense of its own importance. Its greatest 
claim to fame is that S-13VB Studios are located on the mid-
level of the block and it broadcasts to the whole of Sector 13 
and beyond. Run by the formidable Agnes Lamprey (who is 
also president-for-life of the DP Reps Forum), its vid output 
is staggering: hit shows like ‘Swap My Spouse!’, ‘Never Mind 
the Hitchcocks’, ‘Guthrie’s Comedy Die-In’ and ‘Resyk Blues’ 
are syndicated city wide and it boasts a vault-full of Meggies 
(Mega-City One vid show awards) in all major categories.
Its sworn enemy is Buzz Aldrin block. Dotty Parker hates the 
Buzzers’ arrogance but what sparked the feud was a block-
embargo Buzz Aldrin imposed over a decade ago when 
S-13VB broadcast its infamous ‘Blocks Exposed!’ show (it 
won 24 Meggies, including ‘Best Violence’, ‘Best Editing’ 
and ‘Best Voiceover – Human’ categories) which centred 
completely on Buzz Aldrin block. It did not cast the block in 
a good light and that led to enmity. Buzz Aldrin embargoed 
all SB-13VB broadcasts for an entire year, thereby earning 
the wrath of Agnes Lamprey and consequently the whole of 
Dotty Parker block.
Agnes Lamprey controls Dotty Parker block like a personal 
ﬁ efdom. Prestigious jobs in her studios go to those whom she 
favours – and she does not necessarily favour competence. 
The DP Reps Forum merely acts on her instructions and the 
residents of Dotty Parker have zero say in the block’s affairs. 
Agnes rules the roost from her summit suite penthouse 
(occupying an entire double-letter level) and there she 
entertains the great, the good and the popular from across 
Mega-City One. Her parties are legendary, attended by vid-
stars, music stars, artists, fashion designers, politicos and 
inﬂ uential of ﬁ cials. When Agnes Lamprey announces a 
party, it is hot gossip and selected highlights are broadcast 
in ‘Party Nite with Agnes’, one of her station’s most highly 
rated shows.
Beneath her, the block steadily crumbles. It has come out 
worst in the Block Wars it has fought and so much money is 
diverted to the colossal costs of running the studio that block 
maintenance is thin on the ground. As an older block that 
sustained a couple of missile hits in the Apocalypse War, the 
building’s state of repair is grim and level C-West completely 
collapsed, killing 800 residents, ﬁ ve years ago. The whole 
catastrophe was blamed on Buzz Aldrin insurgents (triggering 
a minor war) and a vide-thon raised MCr. 18 to have the wing 
rebuilt (only MCr. 6 made it into the rebuild coffers; the rest 
went into making the spectacular, 900 episode epic ‘Gone 
Like the Wind’, made by – you guessed it – S-13VB).
But Dotty Parker’s residents are in awe of Agnes Lamprey. 
Mega-City One celebrities are always visiting the block as 
part of their studio conrtacts and Agnes parades them up 
and down the levels on ‘Celeb Sweeps’, allowing the great, 
DP unwashed, to almost shake the hands of their heroes and 
heroines. The block loves Agnes and so its appalling state 
of repair and simmering feud with Buzz Aldrin, is completely 
forgiven – as long as the block continues to make great, 
Meggie-award winning broadcasts and the celebs continue 
to tramp through the block’s corridors.
Naturally, Jimmy Gandol ﬁ ni’s Crew has people inside S-
13VB, pulling strings and scams here and there. Repair 
contracts get awarded to Crew construction companies, 
although they do just enough to make it look like an efﬁ cient 
job and not quite enough to ensure that, six months later, 
they need to come back to do more work. Elsewhere, Buzz 
Aldrin has its own people inside Dotty Parker, looking for 
ways to goad an all-out Block War but to no avail thus far.
And Agnes Lamprey and her dirty little secret? Well, she owes 
a great deal of her in ﬂ uence to the demoness Gorgonessa, 
a vile creature brought through the dimensional gate during 
Necropolis that has managed, somehow, to remain, with 
the help of Agnes Lamprey’s wretched psionic niece, 
Letitia. Gorgonessa inhabits an ancient urn that forms part 
of Agnes’s treasure haul and it offers advice and a certain 
amount of psychic and sorcerous help that ensures S-13VB 
continues to win awards and attract the biggest stars. All 
Agnes and Letitia need to do is feed Gorgonessa a fresh, 
human soul every month and the demoness is happy. 
With an over-populated block beneath her and plenty of 
sycophantic fools aching to gain Agnes’s favour, keeping 

===PAGE 264===
 Sector 13
263
Gorgonessa happy is an easy task. And the sacri ﬁ ces are 
always carefully chosen by Letitia to ensure they will never 
be missed…
Zeb Pike Block
Population: 33,000
Block Assembly: Zeb Citizens’ Forum
Allies:  Jon Bon Jovi
Enemies: Bruce Springsteen
A sparkling new block, built on the ruins of the old, Norm 
Schwarzkopf block (tac-nuked during the Apocalypse War), 
Zeb Pike houses the Mega-City One Central Memorial 
Hospital, a state-of-the-art medical facility that acts as the 
main hospital for the Eustace Fargo spaceport. The hospital 
occupies all 102 ﬂ oors of the east wing whilst the residential 
west wing houses the populace.
Because of the hospital, Zeb Pike is careful to stay out of 
Block Wars, although that does not stop it from allying with 
Jon Bon Jovi block against Bruce Springsteen. It is difﬁ cult to 
discern the motive for this alliance but it exists nonetheless. 
It may be down to the fact that when the block was built 
some Jon Bon Jovi overspill was allocated to Zeb Pike and 
old allegiances just die hard.
Being such a recent block, Zeb Pike is designed to be 
maintenance-free and has some of the most advanced 
automated maintenance facilities of any block within a 
hundred sectors. The hospital’s maintenance facilities are 
part of the overall block circuitry and so the residential wing 
beneﬁ ts from ﬁ rst-rate cleaning robotic cleaning and repair 
facilities as well as assured power, with back-up, 24/7. 
Apartment rents are higher in Zeb Pike than the other blocks 
and so it attracts wealthier citizens but for the most part the 
block is as normal as one can get for a Mega-City One city 
block. It has all mod cons, including a Palais-de-Boing® and 
this makes Lloyd H Conover block exceedingly jealous.
The Zeb Citizens’ Forum is a real, honest-to-goodness 
democracy, with free votes and representative rights. 
Elections are held biannually and any resident is eligible to 
stand. Current leader of the forum is Elmer Fudd Gantry, 
leader of the K-Level Party and once a pro-democracy 
supporter and veteran of the Grand Hall of Justice march 
back in 2109. His views have tempered somewhat and 
he now has no issue with Justice Department control of 
the city but for local representation he is a true democrat 
and believer in fair-play/one-citizen, one-vote politics. The 
K-Level party is moderate politically and ensures that the 
enmity with Bruce Springsteen is kept at bay, although the 
E-Level Party, which consists of old Jon Bon Jovi overspill, 
opposes this line vociferously and agitates for action against 
the so-called Boss Block. Thankfully, K-level Party has the 
support of the F, G, M and Q level parties and this keeps 
E-Level on the… level.
The hospital covers all major treatments and has some 
of the ﬁ  nest human surgeons in the world. This includes 
Doctor Hyram Foster-Gloster, a prominent plastic surgeon 
who specialises in respiratory system repair, replacement 
and enhancement – a key skill given the number of aliens 
who come into Sector 13 via the spaceport. Also well 
known amongst the hospital staff is Doctor Doug Klooney, a 
heartthrob obstetrician and part-time vid star who appeared 
in the hit S-13VBC production ‘Meg ER’, playing himself. 
Plenty of women, from all over Mega-City One, have either 
deliberately got themselves pregnant or brought their off-
spring into the hospital, just to be treated by the rugged, 
handsome, vain, wealthy, single, Doctor Doug. Some 
women have even come into the hospital in the hope of 
getting pregnant by him – and on at least six occasions 
Judges have had to break-up ﬁ ghts between rabid Doug-
Fans (or Duggies) who all claim he agreed to marry them or 
impregnate them or even just give them a peck on the cheek. 
As a result, Doctor Doug is under caution by Sector House 
not to encourage fan behaviour or to face a Contributing to 
Anti-Social Behaviour charge. So Doctor Doug keeps a low 
proﬁ le, whilst a growing, makeshift settlement of all-female 
Duggies has established itself in Kildare Plaza, outside Zeb 
Pike block. Doctor Doug is now a prisoner of his own block 
and, such is the fanaticism of the Duggies, he has over ﬁ fty 
unrepentant stalkers.
Bruce Springsteen Block
Population: 29,000
Block Assembly: The E Street Band
Allies:  Dotty Parker
Enemies: Jon Bon Jovi, Zeb Pike
Second of the Rock Blocks, Bruce Springsteen block is a 
parody of a guitar-shape and proudly ﬂ ies, at the very top of 
its Citi-Def emplacement, a massive ﬂ ag emblazoned with the 
words ‘The Boss Lives’, in abject de ﬁ ance of neighbouring 
Jon Bon Jovi block across E Street Plaza.
Like JBJ, Springsteen is named for the rock legend of 
the 20
th Century born in this vicinity of the Old City. It is a 
working-class block (a contradiction in terms; less than 0.5% 
of its citizens have a job) and, like JBJ, the ancient old rocker 
forms the basis of the E Street Cult – those who worship 
Brucie’s music, scathing lyrical attacks on the old culture 
of America and diehard left-leaning patriotism. The cult, of 
which all residents are honorary members whether they 

===PAGE 265===
 Sector 13
264
like it or not, claims to own Springsteen’s bones, which are 
locked away in the block’s central vaults. Indeed, a skeleton 
is there but no one can prove if the bones belonged to the 
Boss or not. The most valued residents are allowed into the 
vault to gaze upon the Great Man’s skeleton, which is formed 
into a famous pose (one arm leaning on his sax-honking 
bodyguard, Clarry Clemons, guitar round his shoulders at 
a rock-god angle) from one of Springsteen’s most famous 
audio recordings. Touching is strictly forbidden: only direct 
descendents of the Boss may go anywhere near the statue 
and, although many in the block claim such heritage, none 
can prove it. Owning old Springsteen CDs is not, in itself, 
proof of lineage.
The block is run on semi-democratic lines by the E Street 
Band, an elected council that is meant to represent each 
level of the block but, in reality, represents only those who are 
true Boss fanatics. Band members are recognisable by their 
ripped jeans, checked shirts and plasteen-capped labourer’s 
boots. In truth, the E Street Band runs the block reasonably 
well and does not, thankfully, insist on Springsteen songs 
being piped through the building morning, noon and night 
– as does JBJ. In fact, any practice JBJ block adopts, 
Springsteen rejects just to be different. The amenities of the 
block are named for the old E Street band (Brucie’s backing 
band, not the council) members: so Stevie Van Zandt 
Shopping Plaza dominates the lower stories and the Clarry 
Clemons Parkarama graces the basement section. The Nils 
Lofgren Zoomtube station is around halfway up the block 
and it curves away over the plaza to join with the Sector 13 
main zoomtube about half a kilometre away.
Hatred between Springsteen and Jon Bon Jovi block is well 
known and the Springsteeners revel in the rivalry every bit 
as much as the Bonjovites across the plaza. Head of the 
E Street Band (the council, not Brucie’s backing band) is 
Waynetta Sconce, the young (thank-you Nu-You face clinics 
and rejuve!), attractive, ﬂ irtatious daughter of the old head, 
Wayne Sconce. Waynetta is waiting for JBJ to provoke all-
out Block War but does not intend making the ﬁ rst move. It 
is not something Brucie would have done, back in the old 
days and so neither will his name-sake block. Instead, she 
is quite content to sanction the E Street juve gang to harass 
the Slippery ‘n’ Wets, provoking them into increasingly bitter 
turf wars, fought when the Judges are not looking.
The E Street Juves are fascinated by cars and inspired by 
the Boss’s ﬁ nest lyrics on his seminal, apocryphal album 
‘Born to Run’. Using Clarry Clemons Parkarama as their 
base, the E Street Juves prep their old, petrol-burning 
suicide machines in their spring-cages. At night, when the 
trafﬁ c ebbs a little, the gang members rev their engines and 
burst out from the cages and onto the Kev Spacey Intersect 
to partake in ‘Last-Chance Power Drives’, at high speed, 
down Meryl Streep skedway, through the Patty McBride 
underzoom and then onto Budd Abbott Megway. As this 
route takes the juves around the edge of E Street Plaza, 
close to where the Slippery ‘n’ Wets hang-out, the E Street 
Juves take the opportunity for a little drive-by shooting and 
hoping that there is no Lawmaster parked on the Justice 
Ramp a little further up the sked. To date, ﬁ fteen innocent 
citizens have been injured or killed by these Power Drives 
and Chief DiMaggio at Sector House has ordered a clean 
up of the gang to prevent more maiming and death. But 
the resources of Justice Department are stretched thinly 
and Judges cannot be everywhere at once: the clean up 
operation (Codename: Nebraska) is taking its time.
Springsteen block enjoys an alliance with Dotty Parker block 
owing to assistance given during the Apocalypse War when 
Sector 13’s blocks turned on Buzz Aldrin. The alliance is 
fragile but still present and Waynetta Sconce enjoys the 
patronage of Agnes Lamprey, having attended several of 
her parties. Waynetta has also sent several of her people 
over to meet with Agnes on various occasions and has 
wondered why they never decided to return. These people 
were promised jobs in S-13VBC studios, so they probably 
have jobs now, as grips or Best Boys – whatever it is Agnes 
had planned for them. It is good that blocks can co-operate, 
Waynetta believes; and it is just a shame that Jon Bon Jovi 
block cannot acknowledge that the real King of Rock was the 
man they called The Boss and not some long-haired proto-
metallist who preferred spandex to good, hard-wearing 
synthi-denim.
Sector House 
13
A ﬁ fty-storey fortiﬁ ed bubble, vaguely resembling a Justice 
Department helmet, Sector House 13 is located to the north 
the sector near the intersection between the Aaron Burr and 
Davey Copperﬁ eld Megways. The original Sector House 
was smaller but it suffered during the Apocalypse War and 
was rebuilt into its current form shortly after. The Sector 
House is well equipped, with Tek, Med and Psi Divisions all 
represented to a reasonable degree. The sub-level garages 
house a Manta Prowl tank and the upper level hangar 
houses three H Wagons that are detailed to cover the whole 
of Sector 13 and provide back up to Sectors 11 and 12, as 
needed. The Med Division medbays are as well-equipped 
as those of the Mega-City One Central Memorial Hospital, 
over at Zeb Pike and provide relief med facilities for Sectors 
11 and 12 also.

===PAGE 266===
 Sector 13
265
In the shadow of Sector House 13 is Iso Block 911, which 
houses perps doing stretches of between eight and ﬁ fteen 
years. Next to it is Psycho Block 101, which holds mid-level 
kooks who can (or should) be curable within two to four 
years of referral. Sector House 13 provides Judges on guard 
detail for both facilities.
Sector Chief Hal DiMaggio has been in charge of the Sector 
House for nine years but was a senior Judge in the sector 
before that and led the resistance during the Apocalypse 
War. He is pushing 60 years old now and the Judges reckon 
he will opt for the Long Walk in the next three to ﬁ ve years. 
Gruff, grey-haired and pock-marked, he is every bit an old 
school Judge who worked with Dredd on several occasions 
and, as a young Street Judge, did not shrink in awe and fear 
of Chief Judge Cal. DiMaggio is highly anti-mutant, believing 
that the relaxation of the Mutant Laws was a huge mistake 
for all concerned. His ofﬁ cers are under instructions to come 
down hard on any muties who ﬂ out the law in his sector. He 
is equally tough on the growing drug problem, exacerbated 
by the sector’s proximity to the Eustace Fargo spaceport 
and an in ﬂ ux of off-world chemicals that, whilst not strictly 
illegal, have contributed to rising crime levels amongst the 
juve gangs of the lower levels of the sector and in some 
of the blocks. Of less concern to him is organised crime. 
There has not been a Mob War since before Max Contralto 
became head of the Jimmy Gandol ﬁ ni Crew and even the 
murderous Azbury Park Brotherhood, the Contralto Crew’s 
nearest rivals, have remained low-key in recent years. This 
allows DiMaggio to focus on controlling the drugs and mutie 
problems that he believes are at the heart of Sector 13’s 
crime statistics.
DiMaggio takes a personal interest in the careers of all his 
Judges. Sector 13 has ﬁ ve hundred Street Judges, one 
hundred Tek, eighty Med and seven Psi Judges. He insists 
on monthly ﬁ tness assessments and reports, co-ordinated 
by his Med team and he likes to personally brief all Judges 
at least once a week instead of relying on machines or 
other Senior Judges to do it. His memory is phenomenal: 
he knows the name and arrest record of every Judge in his 
sector and is both quick to praise and admonish as circumstances dictate. Any Judge who screws-up is summoned for one of 
his infamous ‘Helmet Dentings’ where he directs his gruff, thick, old New York accent in a criticism-laden barrage against the 
hapless miscreant in a stream so hard, it can dent a helmet. Conversely, when a Judge performs well and cracks a major or 
difﬁ cult case, he is personally overjoyed to hand out a citation in front of all the other Judges, even if the recipient had a Helmet 
Denting that same morning.
DiMaggio is supported by Deputy Chief Abi Dryden. Dryden heads-up Psi Division in Sector 13 and is one of Justice Department’s 
best empaths. She understands DiMaggio perfectly, having worked with him for almost thirteen years and her approach mirrors 
his: attention to detail and a genuine concern for her Judges. But, as an empath, Dryden is easier to get along with, tailors her 
mood to those she is talking to and manages to place everyone at ease. She still walks rounds at Psyko Block 101, helping to 
treat the inmates there and occasionally gets summoned to Grand Hall to assist with high-pro ﬁ le Psi cases. Unlike DiMaggio, 
Dryden is worried about organised crime. Her best precogs have all reported premonitions of some form of power-struggle 

===PAGE 267===
 Sector 13
266
accommodation in the ‘Saturn Towers’, off the junction 
of Scala and Stieglitz skedways. There are no known 
bodysnatchers or organleggers at work in Sector 13 and the 
disappearances could be coincidence but DiMaggio wants 
them investigated.
Tapping Rise
A possible tapping gang working the lower pedways of 
Lindbergh sub-district. The pedways are a favourite shortcut 
to and from Fargo Spaceport. The tappers use old-fashioned 
bolt-cutters to threaten their marks, which indicates someone 
with access to 20
th Century tools.
Sector 13 Festival
Held every year and centred on Alf Kinsey ped-plaza, 
largest of the open plazas in the sector. The festival attracts 
all manner of craze fanatics, simps, uglies, punks and 
neuromantics who come to listen to the local bands who 
play the temporary festival arena. Psi Division predicts 
trouble between Springsteen and Bonjovites this year – 81% 
chance of it happening – so Judge presence will be larger 
than usual this year.
Mopad Piracy
A sharp rise in mopad piracy on and around Whitney 
Houston Mega-Circular and Norm Mailer Megway Intersect. 
The perps may have a fake Service Hov and be acting in 
response to home-shopping deliveries put out by mopad 
residents. There are no reports of stolen service Hovs in 
the sector but several from Sectors 14, 27, 108 and 224. 
Could be an itinerant gang. Either way, Sector 13 has been 
targeted.
Substance Running
Someone is funding drug runs through Fargo Spaceport. 
More drugs are hitting Sector 13 streets than ever before and 
DiMaggio wants this cracked. Someone at the spaceport is 
smoothing the way, which means someone is taking a cut of 
the proﬁ ts. Obvious suspects are those working for known 
Contralto Crew companies servicing the spaceport but they 
are, by no means, the only culprits.
 Eustace 
Fargo 
Spaceport
Eustace Fargo is located northwest of Sector 13 and borders 
Sector 10. The spaceport has three terminals – two for 
passenger services and one dedicated to commercial and 
cargo services. Each terminal has four take-off and landing 
zones, with each zone having three launch and landing 
between the organised crime groups in the not too distant 
future. Details are exceedingly hazy and the recurring motif 
of the premonitions is a full moon. DiMaggio listens to her 
concerns but dismisses them, noting that a 74.6% chance 
of accuracy is not a basis for going to war with the gangs. 
Dryden is subtly attempting to convince him otherwise.
Head of Tek Division is Tek Chief Hawking. A wizard with 
vehicles, he came to Sector 13 from the Q Branch of Tek 
Central at the Grand Hall of Justice. He worked on several 
Manta versions before transferring and is currently engaged 
in research on the vehicle pro ﬁ les for the highways around 
the sector. He wants to ﬁ nd a way of clamping down on the 
Last Chance Power Rides of the E Street Juves through the 
use of fully automated prowl cars instead of having to rely on 
Street Judge patrols. The scheme needs funding and, if his 
developments meet with GHoJ approval, then he can put his 
plans into production using the Sector House garages and 
armoury.
Head of Med Division is Med Chief Holby. A specialist in 
off-world diseases and chemicals, it is his team that has 
researched and classi ﬁ ed the various off-world narcotics 
coming through Fargo Spaceport. Three in particular are 
of real interest and all originate in the Qux system. One, 
‘Glean’, is a combat stimulant; not illegal, as it is also an 
anaesthetic but it does have certain emotion-suppressing 
properties. The second, ‘Flare’, is mildly hallucinogenic 
but no more so than many legal stimulants; instead, Holby 
believes it is linked to Petty Crime Addiction, relaxing the 
inhibitions of its users and increasing petty crime propensity. 
The third, ‘Cake’, is a little like Umpty Candy but clearly an 
independent concoction. It tastes damned ﬁ ne and has no 
known damaging side effects but is in such short supply 
that the usual drug-runners are selling small amounts of it 
alongside their usual stashes of zziz and ganja.
Sector House 13 has all the standard facilities of any other 
Sector House and plenty more. Street Judges bene ﬁ t from 
excellent resources and a diligent control room that covers 
most of the sector. Current trouble spots are:
Springsteen/Bon Jovi Block 
Relations
A series of Power Drives by E Street Juves left three 
Slipperies on their way to Resyk last month. DiMaggio wants 
the perps caught and slammed inside for 30 ASAP.
Missing Persons
Four unsolved MP reports in the past four months: 
two from Dotty Parker block and two spacers who had 
returned from an inter-system haul and found temporary 

===PAGE 268===
 Sector 13
267
pads. Terminal One supports direct landing and take-off 
spacecraft; small vessels capable of interplanetary and 
hyperdrive travel but which are also capable of atmospheric 
operation. Terminal Two supports shuttle services to the 
orbital docking platforms for the larger ships which cannot 
enter the atmosphere. Terminal Three is the commercial 
and cargo area and mixes both shuttle and direct services. 
Passenger and commercial/cargo are effectively autonomous 
operations although all the ﬂ ight and landing procedures are 
regulated from the Operational Control Services building.
The immense, twin geodesic domes of the main halls 
dominate the skyline for kilometres around, ﬂ anked by the 
huge, cantilevered hangar and maintenance buildings to 
either side. Zoomtube transits provide the main arteries with 
the surrounding sectors, as well as the sixteen-lane Angie 
Dickinson Megway. The sector districts around Fargo offer a 
mixture of the high class, middling-fare and low-rent in terms 
of accommodation, shopping and housing. Many of the 
residents work at the spaceport in blue collar facilities, whilst 
the transitory population is of the business and travelling 
class, en-route to off-world.
Eustace Fargo is one of the oldest non-military, commercial 
spaceports in operation. Upgraded in the early 21
st Century, 
it was once known as Newark International but over the 
next one hundred years was refashioned as space-faring 
technology developed, commercial space ﬂ ight became 
cheaper to sustain and cargo requirements were developed. 
In 2112 it was redesigned by George ‘Capability’ Puce, the 
famed architect behind several domed habitats, including 
New London (Brit-Cit) and New Carthage (Tunisia) in the 
early 2090s. He was responsible for the construction of the 
twin domes and the redesign of the space-side facilities 
and maintenance yards. Fargo retained its old airport-style 
infrastructure and feel but the passenger facilities were now 
in keeping with the dome habitat approach so familiar and 
comfortable for many in Mega-City One.
Terminal Three handles all cargo and trade ﬂ ights into and 
out of Fargo. The Cargo and Commerce Services hangar 
attached to Terminal Three provides full manifest reporting 
and checking facilities, with several teams of docking crews 
(all Contralto-controlled or owned) responsible for monitoring 
the cargo coming through the facility and getting it loaded 
and unloaded. Docking crews have the authority to open and 
check all cargo, irrespective of owner and destination. Most 
checks are performed with the latest scanning and detection 
apparatus but physical checks are conducted randomly or if 
suspicions are aroused. Judges maintain a visible presence 
here although all manifest checking is handled by the 
docking teams.
The terminal does not provide anything other than very 
short-term storage for inbound and outbound cargo; there 
is simply too much of it, so the facility is a constant through-
ﬂ ow of a bewildering array of goods and equipment. Where 
cargo storage is necessary, a short-term storage facility is 
offered to the east of the main services building but all cargo 
is subject to rigorous security checks before being stored and 
as it emerges from storage. There have been a few cases of 
stowaways bribing their way into the storage depot and so 
vital signs scans are conducted on each item as it enters and 
leaves. Stowaways who are caught are taken to the security 
centre for detention and questioning before being placed 
under arrest and handed over to the duty Judges.

===PAGE 269===
 Sector 13
268
Other Areas 
of Interest 
in Sector 13
Majestyk’s Bar and Grill 
(South End, E Street Plaza)
Run by the Majestyk family for over ﬁ fty years, the Bar and 
Grill offers good, simply prepared munce at ridiculously 
inﬂ ated prices – as do most of the food outlets in the E Street 
Plaza area. Pictures of the Majestyk family down the years 
line the walls and the current manager Gil Majestyk tends 
front of house whilst his twin sons Dominic and Dashford 
manage the bar. It specialises in synthi-beers from around the 
Sol system and beyond, boasting a range of ninety different 
types and strengths. ‘We Can Refresh Ya!’ is the tagline 
and it is the Bar and Grill’s sheer variety and the constant 
stream of curious customers that allow it to get away with the 
exorbitant prices it charges. Food is grilled munce and soy-
vegetables served in a variety of styles, although the chef, 
Montalban, has introduced several off-world specialities 
over the years. The atmosphere is friendly and convivial and 
the clientele eclectic. The Bar and Grill is popular with alien 
visitors and consequently the Majestyk’s maintain a healthy 
stock of food and beers to suit their palates.
Gil Majestyk is a front man for the Contraltos of Jimmy 
Gandolﬁ ni block and has contacts at Fargo spaceport 
Terminal Three. This means that he is able to receive and 
move certain contraband stocks on behalf of the Contralto 
Crew and on behalf of others. It takes years to earn Gil’s 
trust and thus make use of his services and contacts but if 
the price is right and discretion assured, Gil can handle it. 
If he is crossed, his friends in Jimmy Gandol ﬁ ni make sure 
retribution is swift, painful and conveying the right message. 
Gil Majestyk and his family are clever and carefully cover 
their trail, with considerable help from Max Contralto (who 
likes to eat at the restaurant). 
Rumsay’s (1004
th Street and 
Acres Pedway, Upper Level)
Considered somewhat passé but still popular, is the Brit-
Cit-based Ramsay food chain, specialising in ﬁ ne cuisine 
at affordable prices. The menu is typically 21
st Century 
specialties: over-presented fast food with ostentatious 
titles served with a scowl and an expletive. Mega-City One 
citizens delight in this collision of style and attitude, enjoying 
the howls and curses emanating from the kitchen area. A 
holograph of the long-dead proprietor, demonstrating the 
preparation of the restaurant’s signature dishes, plays across 
the numerous tri-dee displays but there is no masking the 
pretension of the place. For fast food, the quality is good 
and prices reasonable but there is no question over the un-
ambitious (yet remarkably quaint) approach to presentation.
eezyBed (Various franchises 
across Sector 13)
A self-service hotel, the cubicle rooms are for rent using a 
credit chip either by the hour, day or week. Each cubicle 
has a fold-down bed, table, washbasin, shower and 
communication facilities. Very popular with budget travellers 
going to, or coming from, Fargo Spaceport, it is affordable, 
no-frills comfort. The communication system has a direct 
link into the Geisha Bank, allowing guests to select intimate 
company according to their means and preferences. 
Naturally enough eezyBed (or Sleazybed, as most know 
it) has a seedy reputation but it provides a vital service 
considering the ridiculous prices charged by the likes of the 
Hyatt and other brand hotels.
The Geisha Bank (Illegal Adult 
Services)
The Geisha Bank describes itself as a ‘personal shopping and 
facilitation service for the busy commercial traveller’. For an 
appropriate hourly fee, one of the Bank’s attractive, skilled 
Personal Assistants will act as a personal shopper, a guide 
around the sector, a messenger or, as is most common but 
curiously never advertised, an escort. The Bank has over three 
hundred Personal Assistants of a variety of races on its books, 
all with impeccable security credentials, providing services to 
all classes of traveller (as long as they can pay). The business 
is entirely legal as long as it is conducted with discretion and 
the Geisha Bank’s owners, Jubal Masakara and Diana Wade, 
are never less than discrete. Naturally enough they learn a 
great deal about what is happening within the sector and 
elsewhere and have the good sense to offer their intelligence 
for sale in the right quarters, including the Sector House and 
the ever-curious Jimmy Gandolﬁ ni block.

===PAGE 270===
 Index
269
Index
Academy of Law  160
Advanced Talents  184
Age  10
Aliens  208
Allies  40
Ammunition  93, 98
Angel Gang  224
Antarctic City  176
Apes  219
Armour  92, 103
Armour-Piercing (round)  96
Atlantis  179
Aura Perception  185
Batglider  107
Belliwheel  107
Beneﬁ ts  11
Big Smelly  161
Bike Cannon  102
Bike Computer  101
Birdy  92
Bleepers  92
Blitzing  88
Block War  66, 156
Body Sharking  88
Boing®  107
Boinging®  167
Boomway  122
Bootknife  92
Boots  92
Breathalyser  92
Brit-Cit  177
BroadWay  122
Cal Hab  177
Characteristics  10
Chief Judge  57
Chopper  226
Chronometer  92
Chump Dumping  89
COE  70
Combat Acuity  50
Combat Engineering  47
Conapts  158
Contacts  40
Control Crash  50
Council of Five  59
Crazes  167
Crazies  210
Crowd Control  51
Ciudad Barranquilla  177
Ciudad España  177
Cyclops Laser  102
Cyclops Laser Cannon  72
Dark Judges  227
Data Access  51
Daystick  101
Dead Halt  51
Dead Zone  51
Desperation  76
Dimensional Manipulation  
185
Dog Vultures  220
Drive  49
East-Meg One  179
East-Meg Two  177
Education  10
Eeziglide  122
Emerald Isle  178
Empire State Building  161
Enemies  40
Energy Kinesis  187
Enhanced Power  51
Enhanced Talent  51
Enlistment  10
Equipment  92
Euro-City  178
Eustace Fargo Spaceport  
266
Events  12
Face-Changing  109
Fargo  55
Fatties  212
Fire Foam Jet  72
Flyer  47
Formidable Presence  51
Full Eagle Day  37
Gila-Munja  220
Grand Hall of Justice  161
Gun Combat  47
H-Wagon  146
Handcuffs  92
Heat Seeking (round)  96
Helmet  93
High-Explosive (round)  96
Holding Posts  76
Holocaust Squad  41, 88
Hondo City  178
Hotdog Run  35
Incendiary (round)  96
Indo City  178
Inﬂ uence  10
Informers  40
Inner Strength  51
Insanity  203
Interrogation  47
Jerry-Rig  51
Judda, The  229
Judge Cal  228
Judge Hound  72
Jungle, The  159
Klegghound  221
Kleggs  221
Land Raider  148
Law  49, 75
Lawgiver  93
Lawmaster  99, 102
Life Saver  51
Long Walk  65
Luxor City  178
Manta Prowl Tank  147
Mayor  155
Maze, The  159
Meat Wagon  88, 146
Medipack (advanced)  99
Medipak  98
Mediterranean Free-States  
179
Med Judges  68
Med Squad  88
Mega-City One  154
Mega-City One Geography  
50
Mega-City One History  50
Mega-City Two  178
MegWay  123
Mental Instability  199
Micro Forensics Lab  99
Munce  108
Mutants  213, 222
Numbers Rackets  89
Oh, So That’s What It Does...  
52
Organisations  171
Orlok the Assassin  228
Override Card  98
Oz  178
Palais-de-Boing®  109, 166
Parkarama  123
Pat Wagon  145
Pedway  123
Perps  218
Perp Running  89
Perp Sense  52
Personal Enhancement  189
PJ Maybe  229
Pollution Meter  98
Projection  189
Psionic Attack  190
Psionic Defence  192
Psionic Equipment  203
Psionic Trauma  196, 197
Psi Division  61, 182
PSU  70
Psykers  183
Psyking  89
Rad Rat  222
Rapid Aim  52
Rapid Assessment  52
Rapid Diagnosis  52
Rapid Fire  96
Recovery  52
Ricochet (round)  96
Riot Foam  72
Riot Foam Jet  72
Riot Squad  88
Robots  232
Robot Wars, The  231
Scanalyser  99
Scattergun  102
Seasoned Judges  39
Sector Houses  70
Senior Judges  59
Sentencing  76
Sewer-Gators  223
Silencer  98
Simba City  179
Sino-City Two  179
Sixth Sense  52
SJS  41, 63
SJS Helmet Radio  72
Skills  47
Skills and Special 
Techniques  10
Skysurﬁ ng  166
Sleep Machine  71
Slipzoom  125
Smokatorium  109, 166
Social Standing  10
Spaceships  150
Space Colonies  180
Space Corps  70
Special Techniques  50
Sports  166
Spy-in-the-Sky Camera  72
Standard Execution (round)  
96
Statue of Justice  162
Statue of Liberty  162
Steady Hand  52
Stookie Glanding  90
Street Cannon  73
Street Judges  65
Street Perception  50
Stumm Gas Dispenser  73
Stumm Gas Rounds  98
Superslab  125
Tapping (psionic ability)  193
Tek Division  62
Tek Squad  88
Temporal Manipulation  193
Term Four  36
Term One  13
Term Three  19
Term Two  16
Texas City  179
Timeline  242
Titan  65
Track Perp  53
Troggies  223
Tweaks  223
Umpty Bagging  89
Umpty Candy  108, 168
Uniform  92
Untrained Skills  12
Uranium City  180
Vatican City  180
Vehicles  125
Wally Squad  41, 68
Wayby  125
Weapons  110
Weather Control  159
White Cliffs of Dover  162
Zipper Bike  73
Zipstrip  125
Zoomtube  125

===PAGE 271===


===PAGE 272===


===PAGE 273===
Coming Autumn 2009
www.mongoosepublishing.com


===PAGE 274===
