--- PAGE 8





--- PAGE 9

01
7
The people at the end of time
01
The People  
at the End of Time
Of course the world ends. It happens quickly, faster 
than anyone could predict. The Red Plague hits 
a world already on the brink of collapse. Extreme 
climate change, global economic crisis, increasing 
conflict between old and new superpowers. When 
the pandemic comes, the last thin veneer of stabil-
ity crumbles.
One billion people die in the first year. Utter 
panic reigns supreme, solidarity between nations 
is non-existent. Wars break out over the last, dwin-
dling resources of the world. For the first time since 
1945 nuclear weapons are used in armed conflict. 
Mushroom clouds rise from east to west.
Everyone tries to save themselves. The rich and 
powerful start monumental projects to escape the 
surface of the dying  Earth: going deep underground, 
to the bottom of the oceans, into the cold darkness of 
space. The seats in these final lifeboats for mankind 
are desperately few. For most of the world’s inhabit-
ants, there is no way out.
Once it’s all over, Earth is still. Nature invades 
ruined cities. Winds sweep through empty streets 
turned into graveyards. Time gnaws the windows 
off skyscrapers, panes falling to the ground in a slow 
rain of glass.
Yet life remains. Slivers of humanity survive 
the Apocalypse. In the Ark, a small settlement at 
the edge of a dead city, the People live. You are the 
spawn of humanity, but not quite human. You are 
twisted funhouse images, mutated freaks. Your bod-
ies and minds have incredible powers, but you are 
unstable. Fragile. None of the People are over 30 
years old.
Except the Elder. Your leader, but not like you. 
One of the Ancients. For decades he has warned 
you: be on your guard, don’t leave the Ark. Stay here, 
or the Rot will get you. O

--- PAGE 10

01
8
Player’s Section
try to turn a profit from anyone and everyone. And 
the Elder can’t stand up on his own anymore. They 
say he can’t even take a piss without help. You’re on 
your own now.
It’s time to venture out. To explore the Zone, to 
search for artifacts and knowledge. Build, grow the 
land, seek out others, create a new civilization on the 
ruins of the old one. Seek your origin. No children 
are born to the People – if you do nothing, you will 
perish. Maybe, one day, you will find the Eden of 
legend, the Ancients’ haven from the encroaching 
hellscape. That’s where salvation and truth await, 
the stories say.
Maybe it’s all fairytales. It doesn’t matter. You 
have no choice. This is the beginning.
This is Year Zero.
A ROLEPLAYING GAME
Welcome to Mutant: Year Zero. In this roleplaying 
game you play mutated human beings in a fallen 
world. On your shoulders rests the greatest respon-
sibility of all: to save the last glimmer of human 
civilization from total annihilation.
PLAYERS
Every player except one takes the role of a mutant, 
a Player Character (PC). You decide what your PC 
thinks and feels, what he does and says – but not 
what happens to him. It’s your job as a player to 
immerse yourself in your PC. He may be a mutant 
with supernatural powers – but he is still, at his very 
core, a human being in a desperate world. Imagine 
yourself in your PC’s shoes. What would you do?



--- PAGE 11

01
9
The people at the end of time
Your PCs are always the protagonists of the 
story. This game is about you. Your decisions, your 
lives.
Assembly:  Sometimes you as players have influ-
ence over the People as a whole. At so called As-
semblies you speak for the entire population of the 
Ark and make decisions about which projects the 
People should undertake. Read more about Assem-
blies in Chapter 7.
THE GAMEMASTER
The final player is the Gamemaster (GM). She de-
scribes the ravaged world to you, she plays the other 
mutants in the Ark (so called Non-Player Charac-
ters, or NPCs), she controls the monsters roaming 
the Zone, she decides where the artifacts are hidden. 
It’s the GM’s job to put obstacles in your path and 
challenge your PCs, make them show what they are 
really made of. But it’s not up to the GM to decide 
everything that happens in the game – and certainly 
WARNING TO PLAYERS: 
DON’T READ SECTION II
If you’re a player in this game and not 
the GM, you should not read Section II of 
this book. Chapter 9–18 are for the GM’s 
eyes only. This is especially important for 
Chapter 18, which contains huge spoil-
ers for the metaplot and backstory of the 
game. If you read it beforehand you’ll 
ruin the fun for yourself!



--- PAGE 12

01
1 0
Player’s Section
not how your story ends. That is up to the game. 
That is what you are playing to find out.
Use the players!  Being the GM can feel like an 
overwhelming responsibility, as if the entire game 
rests on your shoulders. It doesn’t. In Section II 
of this book you will find many useful tools. One 
important piece of advice: don’t be afraid to let the 
players help you. Can’t think of anything to say 
when describing a ruined building or an NPC? Let 
a player describe it instead!
SO, WHAT DO YOU DO?
In Mutant: Year Zero  no one will hold your hand 
and show you where to go. You and the other play-
ers create the stories in the game, they are not 
pre-written. You have the power to decide the fate 
of your mutants, and, in the end, of the People as 
a whole. And there is much to do:
FIGHT FOR GRUB, WATER, BULLETS
Starvation is never far away in Mutant: Year Zero. 
Clean water is a luxury. If you don’t have grub and 
water you’ll have to fight to get it – and if you do 
have what you need, you can be sure some other 
freak will try to take it from you. And then you’ll 
need bullets to load your gun, or to buy protection 
from someone stronger.
TAKE PART IN THE PROJECTS
Every day is a fight for survival, but the People want 
more than just to survive. A new society must be 
built, or the Ark – your home – will sooner or later 



--- PAGE 13

01
1 1
The people at the end of time
face collapse and ruin. The People’s projects can be 
anything from building a palisade or growing mush-
rooms to creating a militia or opening a theater. 
The projects increase the Ark’s Development Levels 
(DEV’s). Read more about that in Chapter 7.
PROTECT THE ARK
The Ark is an island in an ocean of chaos. The Peo-
ple have made it so far, but the threats to the Ark 
are getting worse and becoming more frequent. 
Acid rain, disease, attacks from wild beasts or sav-
ages from the depths of the Zone – when danger 
looms someone has to stand in the front line and 
protect the People. Will you do your part?
PROTECT YOUR OWN
You won’t make it far without friends, but your 
friends are also your weakness. When someone 
threatens a friend you need to stand up for them 
– or you’ll be alone when it’s your turn to face the 
heat. And it will be, sooner or later. The grub is too 
scarce, the bullets too few to meet everyone’s needs. 
No one gets far in the Ark without making enemies.
EXPLORE THE ZONE
The Zone is a dangerous and devastated wasteland, 
where the Elder has told you never to go. But if the 
People are to endure, you have to go out there. To  
search. For other mutants, for artifacts from the Old 
Age, for knowledge. The Zone is unknown territory, 
where the invisible Rot will kill you if savages or 
ancient war machines don’t do it first. But you have 
no choice. In the Zone, your future awaits.
SEARCH FOR EDEN
Maybe it’s just a fairytale. A collective figment of 
the imagination. Stories whispered around the 
flickering trashcan-fires in the Ark. But you can-
not stop believing. Believing that salvation – or at 
least the truth about the origin of the People – is 
somewhere out there in the Zone. The People call 
this place E

--- PAGE 14

01
1 2
Player’s Section
yellow ones are called Base Dice , the green ones 
Skill Dice and the black ones Gear Dice. You roll 
the dice when you perform a dramatic action that 
might determine if your mutant lives or dies.
As you can see, the dice have symbols on some 
sides, with the numbers next to them in tiny font. 
The / symbol usually means something good hap-
pens. The = symbol means your mutant powers 
rage forth in your body. The 
  symbol means your 
gear might break. How all that works you will learn 
later.
Note: You can play this game with any normal 
six-sided dice. It does help, however, if you have 
them in three different colors. If you use normal 
dice, a six means / for all types of dice. A one 
means = on a Base Die and 
  on a Gear Die.
THE MUTANT CARD DECK
The Card Deck for Mutant: Year Zero  (available for 
purchase separately) contains playing cards of three 
types: Threat Cards , Mutation Cards  and Artifact 
Cards . The cards help you play the game, but they 
are not absolutely necessary. All information on the 
cards is repeated in this book, and you can roll dice 
instead of drawing cards to get a random result.
Threat Cards:  The Ark is your home, but no longer 
a safe haven. The Threat Cards describe threats that 



--- PAGE 15

01
1 3
The people at the end of time
the People have to deal with. Draw a Threat Card 
at the start of every game session, or whenever you 
want to add drama to the game. If the game was a 
television show the Threat Card would be a teaser 
of what the episode – the session – is about. You can 
draw Threat Cards openly, or the Gamemaster can 
keep them hidden. A third option is for the GM to 
choose a Threat Card. Threat Cards are explained 
further in Chapter 10.
Mutation Cards:  Most aspects of your PC are yours 
to decide, but there is one major exception: muta-
tions. You draw Mutation Cards to decide which 
mutations you get, and you keep them by your 
character sheet as you play. Read more about mu-
tations in Chapter 5.
Artifact Cards: To build a new world you need to 
learn how the old one worked. Out there in the Zone 
there are artifacts, objects from the Old Age that 
still work – or at least can be repaired. To determine 
which artifact you find, you draw an Artifact Card. 
An artifact can you give the extra edge over other 
mutants in the Ark – but if you instead let the Peo-
ple study the artifact, the whole Ark can learn and 
benefit from the object. Read more about artifacts 
in Chapter 16.



--- PAGE 16

01
1 4
Player’s Section
MAP OF THE ZONE
When the game starts the Zone – that is, the world 
outside the Ark – is alien and unknown. All the 
People know is what a few brave Stalkers (page 30) 
have seen, seldom more than the coastlines and 
major landmarks.
On the inside covers of this book, there are 
maps of example Zones. These maps and more ex-
ample Zones are also available for free download 
from the Modiphius and Free League websites.
The Zone maps have plenty of empty space – 
during the game you will explore the Zone sector by 
sector, and draw or note down what you find. Square 
by square the map gets ever more detailed, until 
your campaign is over. Read more about exploring 
the Zone in Chapter 8.
On our websites you can also find an empty 
map template, with nothing but the grid and coor-
dinates. You can use this template to draw a map 
of your own Zone – perhaps based on your own 
hometown?
FAST-FORWARDING
During the game you say what your character does 
and the GM tells you how the world reacts, back and 
forth. But to describe every minute of your mutants’ 
life would get tedious. When nothing important is 
going on, you can fast-forward the story, and con-
tinue playing at a new time and place. Usually it’s 
up to the GM to decide when it’s time to fast-for-
ward, and where to continue. But players are free to 
make suggestions. Usually it’s pretty obvious when 
to fast-forward.
Cutting between PCs.  When your characters are 
in different locations, the GM will cut between you 
when appropriate. Cut pretty often – every 15 min-
utes or so is a good rule – so that no player is left 
out for too long. And if your PC isn’t in the scene, 
this doesn’t mean you have to be quiet – instead, 
stay engaged, immersed and comment on the action. 
Maybe you can e

--- PAGE 17

01
1 5
The people at the end of time
HIM & HER
The Ark may be a hellhole, but at least it doesn’t 
discriminate. Hunger doesn’t care if you’re male or 
female, and neither does the Rot. To reflect both 
genders in the way the rules are written, and still 
keep the language consistent, we use “he” for un-
named players, PCs and NPCs, while the GM is 
always a “she”. In every one of these cases, what 
it really means is “he or she” – but it would be too 
cumbersome to spell that out each and every time.
ROLEPLAYING? WHAT’S THAT?
If you have made it this far without knowing what a 
roleplaying game is – congratulations! Welcome to 
a creative and very rewarding hobby. Roleplaying 
is a unique form of gaming that combines dice-
rolling and storytelling. In a way that books, movies 
and even video games cannot match, roleplaying 
games let you create your own story together with 
your friends, using the rules as a guide and support.
The strength of a roleplaying game can also 
be its weakness – the freedom to create the story 
yourselves can feel overwhelming. But Mutant: Year 
Zero  contains a lot of story hooks, events, locations 
and personalities for you to fill your stories with, as 
well as plenty of tools for the GM to use. And if you 
need help or advice, there is a forum dedicated to 
Mutant: Year Zero  at www.modiphius.com as well as 
at www.freeleaguepublishing.com.
Welcome!
ABBREVIATIONS
PC = Player Character
XP = Experience Points
GM = Gamemaster
NPC = Non-Player Character
DEV = Development Level
A TYPICAL SESSION
Game sessions of Mutant: Year Zero  can vary 
a lot, but this is the typical rundown:
1.  Br
ing out your map of the Zone, character 
sheets, dice and, if you have them, playing 
cards for mutations and artifacts.
2.  Ad
d a number of new Mutation Poi

--- PAGE 18





--- PAGE 19

02
1 7
Your Mutant
02
Your Mutant
Your Player Character (PC) – your mutant – is your 
most important asset in Mutant: Year Zero. He is 
your weapon, your eyes and ears in the world. But 
he, in return, depends on you making the right de-
cisions for him. Don’t screw it up. Take your PC 
seriously and play him as if he was a real person. 
It’s more fun that way. At the same time, don’t try 
to protect your PC from every conceivable danger. 
The goal of the game is to create a good story. For 
that to happen you need to take risks – if you never 
dare, you’ll never win.
ROLE
The first thing you pick for your mutant is his role. 
The role determines who you are and what you 
do in the Ark, your position in the Dawnworld. 
There are eight roles to choose from, each de-
scribed on pages 26–41 at the end of this chapter. 
Avoid having several players pick the same role 
for their characters, as this would make the group 
less diverse.
E X A M P L E
The player Joanna is creating a PC, and she decides 
that she wants to play a Stalker. She takes a charac-
ter sheet and writes down her chosen role.
AGE
When were you born? You don’t know. Nobody in 
the Ark does. But you are all young adults. There 
are no older people except for the Elder. And there 
are no children. Unlike the scrawny mutts that live 
off the Ark’s refuse, the People bear no children. 
You all realize what this means. If no children are 
born, and no one arrives from elsewhere, it’s only 
a matter of time before the People are extinct. Can 
you find Eden before your time is up?
OTHER ROLES
The eight roles re those most common 
in the Ark, but others can be introduced 
– especially once the Ark develops into a 
more advanced society (Chapter 7). New 
roles will be published in the future, and 
you can of course

--- PAGE 20

02
1 8
Player’s Section
NAME
Every role description gives you ten typical names, 
five male and five female. Choose one of these 
names, or make up your own name if you prefer.
E X A M P L E
Joanna picks the name Krin for her Stalker.
ATTRIBUTES
Your four attributes determines what basic strengths 
and weaknesses you are born with. They are meas-
ured on a scale from 1 to 5 for PCs and other regular 
mutants. A higher score is better. Your attributes 
are used when you perform important actions. The 
attribute scores are decreased when you suffer dif-
ferent types of trauma. If an attribute reaches zero 
you are broken. Read more about this in chapter 6. 
There you can also find out how you recover lost 
attribute scores - by consuming a different resource 
for each.
Starting scores:  When you create your PC, you 
should distribute a total of 14 points across the four 
attribute scores. Each attribute must have a starting 
value from 2 to 4 – except one. The attribute listed 
as your “key attribute” by your role description may 
have a starting score of 5.
STRENGTH
Raw physical power and endurance. Strength is de-
creased by damage, and recovered by grub.
AGILITY
Your overall body control and motor skills. Agility 
is decreased by fatigue, and recovered by water.
WITS
Intelligence, alertness and sharpness of mind. Wits 
is decreased by confusion, and recovered by sleep.
EMPATHY
Your charisma and ability to read and affect others. 
Empathy is decreased by doubt  and recovered by 
sympathy.
E X A M P L E
Joanna gives Krin Strength 3, Agility 5, Wits 4 and 
Empathy 2. She is allowed to set Agility to 5 because 
Agility is the Stalker’s key attribute.
EXTRA MUTATION
If you choose to start the game with an extra muta-
tion, one of your attribute scores must be decreased 
on

--- PAGE 21

02
1 9
Your Mutant
Starting Levels:  When creating your character, 
you get to distribute 10 points across your skills. 
The maximum starting level for any skill is 3, and 
you must have at least level 1 in your specialist 
skill – apart from that, you choose your skills 
freely. You can increase your skill levels during 
play (page 29).
E X A M P L E
Krin buys skill level 3 in Shoot, level 2 in Sneak and 
Find the Path, and level 1 in Move, Know the Zone, 
and Heal.
TALENTS
Talents are tricks, moves and minor abilities that 
give you a small edge. They are more specialized 
than skills and give you a way to fine-tune your char-
acter. Talents are further explained in Chapter 4.
You can pick one talent when creating your 
character – but your choices are limited. Your role 
description indicates which talents you can choose 
from. You can learn more talents during the course 
of the game, at which point you will have many 
more talents to choose from.
E X A M P L E
Joanna gets to choose one from the talents Monster 
Hunter, Rot Finder and Scavenger for Krin. She picks 
Scavenger.
MUTATIONS
Your mutations are superhuman abilities. Where 
the mutations come from, no one among the People 
knows. The problem is that they are both unpredict-
able and dangerous – even to yourselves. Besides, 
they can’t always be activated on command. Some-
times the power is there, ready to unleash, some-
times it’s not.
THE MUTATION DRAW
Normally, you get only get one mutation from start. 
You don’t get to choose your mutation – instead you 
draw a random Mutation Card, or roll D66 once on 
the Mutation Table on page 71. Learn to make the 
most of the mutation you’ve got, even if you would 
have preferred another. Mutations are random. Deal 
with it.
Two mutations?  Once you have drawn you

--- PAGE 22

02
2 0
Player’s Section
CharaCter Sheet
Attributes
Strength Damage  ● ● ● ● ●
Agility Fatigue  ● ● ● ● ●
Wits Confusion  ● ● ● ● ●
Empathy Doubt  ● ● ● ● ●
Conditions
Starving  ● Dehydrated  ●
Sleepless  ● Hypothermic  ●
CriticalInjuries:
Mutations
Gear
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Bullets:
Skills
Endure (Strength)
Force (Strength)
Fight (Strength)
Sneak (Agility)
Move (Agility)
Shoot (Agility)
Scout (Wits)
Comprehend (Wits)
KnowtheZone (Wits)
SenseEmotion (Empathy)
Manipulate (Empathy)
Heal (Empathy)
Experience Points
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
Armor rating
Rot Points
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
Mutation Points
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
Appearance
Face:
Body:
Clothing:
Talents
Relationships Buddy
PC1: ●
PC2: ●
PC3: ●
PC4: ●
IHate:
INeedtoProtect:
MyBigDream:
Weapons Bonus Damage range Special
Name: Role:Krin
Hidden under a hood
Wiry, skinny
Camouflage gear
Scrap rifle
Water, 2 rations
Grub, 4 rations
3
5
4
2
2
3
1
1
2
Stalker
Scavenger
Rot-Eater
4
Scrap rifle
The Stalker Yassan, who has gone deeper into the Zone
The Slave Eriel. She doesn’t deserve a life in chains.
To go deep into the Zone and find Eden
Naphta has walked in the Zone with me
Denrik is a pompous idiot
Hugust might actually understand me
+1 1 Long Jury-Rigged
Find the Path
X
X



--- PAGE 23

02
2 1
Your Mutant
CharaCter Sheet
Notes
People I’ve met role Notes
My Den
Description:
GearStashed:
Tiny Items
Yassan
Eriel
Stalker
Slave
The wreck of a van at the edge of the Ark



--- PAGE 24

02
2 2
Player’s Section
RELATIONSHIPS AND DREAMS
Without friends to back you up you won’t survive 
for long in the Ark – and even shorter in the Zone. 
But you have to know who you can trust. Turning 
your back to the wrong mutant can kill you faster 
than the Rot.
Relationships are not the only things connect-
ing you to the world. You also have a personal 
dream of a better future.
Your relationships and dreams affect how you 
earn Experience Points (XP). These choices are also 
important to the GM, who will use them to create 
story elements for the game. This is explained fur-
ther in Chapter 9.
RELATIONSHIPS TO PCs
When creating your PC you must describe your 
relationship to all of the other PCs. You only need 
to write one sentence per PC. Your role description 
gives you premade options to pick from. If you pre-
fer, you can ignore these options and create your 
own relationships.
Buddy:  When you have noted your relationships to 
the other PCs you must choose which one of them 
you feel closest to. That PC is your buddy. Mark 
your choice in the checkbox on the character sheet.
RELATIONSHIPS TO NPCs
Next, choose two NPCs that you have a strong re-
lationship to in some way. You must choose one 
NPC whom you hate and another whom you want to 
keep safe. Your role description provides premade 
options here as well. If you prefer to make these 
NPCs up by yourself (or together with the other 
players in the group), that’s fine too.
YOUR BIG DREAM
Finally, choose what your big dream is, what you 
want more than anything in the world. As in the 
case of relationships, your role description provides 
you with premade options to choose from. Use them 
if you want to.
CHANGING DREAMS & RELATIONSHIPS
Events during the course of the game can change 
your PC fundamentall

--- PAGE 25

02
2 3
Your Mutant
Starting Gear:  Your role description tells you what 
weapons you can choose from when starting the 
game, and how much grub, water and bullets you 
have at the outset. Note that the Gearhead also gets 
to draw a random Artifact Card (or roll once on the 
Artifact table in Chapter 16) right at the start. If 
you want to, you can use your bullets to buy extra 
gear from the start. Use the gear list at the back of 
this book.
Grub & Water:  You must consume one ration of 
grub and one ration of water per day, or you’ll suffer. 
Read more about this on page 92.
ENCUMBRANCE
There’s a limit to how much gear you can carry - and 
you don’t want to make yourself a target for robbers 
anyway. You can carry a number of regular items 
equal to double your Strength score. Use your base 
Strength for this, not the temporarily decreased 
value you get when you are hurt (page 88).
Write it down! You must list everything you are 
carrying on the character sheet. List up to one regu-
lar item on each row of the sheet. If an item is not 
on your sheet, you’ve forgotten it or lost it somehow. 
You’ve only got yourself to blame.
HEAVY & LIGHT ITEMS
Heavy or otherwise cumbersome items are harder 
to carry. An item designated as heavy counts as 
two regular items, and takes up two rows on your 
character sheet. Some objects may need as many as 
three or even more rows on your sheet. At the op-
posite end of the spectrum, there are items that are 
light – they count as half of a regular item, and you 
can list two of them on the same row on your sheet.



--- PAGE 26

02
2 4
Player’s Section
GRUB, WATER & BOOZE
Four rations of grub or water count as one regular 
item. That means you can list four rations on one 
row on your character sheet, or two rations plus 
one light item.
Booze  is normally kept in a bottle that counts as 
one regular item. One such bottle contains ten 
doses of the strong stuff (see chapter 6 for effects 
of booze).
TINY ITEMS & BULLETS
Things even smaller than light items are called tiny. 
They are so small and light that they don’t encum-
ber you at all. The rule of thumb is: if the item can 
be hidden in a closed fist, it’s tiny. Tiny things must 
be noted on your character sheet even if they don’t 
encumber you.
Bullets:  Individual bullets count as tiny items. How-
ever, more than 10 bullets count as a light item, 
more than 20 as a basic item and more than 40 as 
a heavy item.
OVER-ENCUMBERED
You can temporarily carry more than your normal 
limit (Strength × 2 items). The drawback is that you 
have to make a roll for the skill Endure (page 24) 
when you want to walk a significant distance, for ex-
ample crossing into a new sector when in the Zone 
(page 122). The same rule applies if you drag some 
other heavy object, like a broken mutant who needs 
care in the Ark. If you fail your skill roll you have to 
drop what you are carrying, or stay where you are.
CARTS & RAFTS
In the Zone, you can use rafts, carts, vehicles and 
the like to load heavy stuff onto. That way, you won’t 
be over-encumbered by it. It’s up to the GM’s judg-
ment how much can be loaded onto the cart or raft.
E X A M P L E
Krin starts the game with 4 bullets, 2 rations of grub 
and 4 rations of water. She also chooses a scrap rifle. 
Krin has Strength 2, and thus she can carry one more 
regular item without being over-encumbered.
YOUR 

--- PAGE 27

02
2 5
Your Mutant
Your den should be located in the Ark or just 
outside of it. You can share a den with other PCs or 
NPCs – if you trust them. It’s a good idea to hold 
off choosing your den until after you have decided 
what the Ark looks like.
DEVELOP YOUR MUTANT
Your character won’t walk through the Zone unaf-
fected. The harsh realities of life after the apoca-
lypse will change you, that’s all you can be certain of 
in an uncertain world. You can develop your mutant 
in several different ways during the game.
NEW MUTATIONS
Every time you activate a mutation, there is a small 
risk that your body or mind will suffer permanent 
trauma. If that happens, you also gain a new muta-
tion (page 70). Simply draw a new Mutation Card 
or roll up new random mutation. Over time, this 
means you will slowly become weaker – and more 
mutated. This does not mean that you suddenly 
develop completely new mutation – rather, latent 
abilities awaken inside you. That’s what it means 
to be a mutant.
EXPERIENCE
As a mutant, it is your fate to slowly decay and 
mutate – but you can learn much before your end 
comes. Such learning is measured in Experience 
Points (XP). You get your XP at the end of every 
session. Hold a debriefing and let the entire group 
talk about that session’s event. For each of the fol-
lowing questions that you can answer with a “yes”, 
you get one XP:
 K Did you participate in the session? (You get 
one XP just for being there.)
 K Did you perform a Day’s Work for a project in 
the Ark (page 103)?
 K Did you explore at least one new sector in the 
Zone?
 K Did you sacrifice or risk something for you 
PC buddy (page 22)?
 K Did you sacrifice or risk something for the 
NPC you want to keep safe?
 K Did you sacrifice or risk something to mess 
with the NPC you

--- PAGE 28

02
2 6
Player’s Section
Enforcer
Every day is a fight for survival. No one 
knows that better than you. As long as 
you can remember, you have been fight-
ing. For grub, for bullets, for respect. Your 
knuckles and your soul are hardened, 
crushing a jaw no longer hurts. You 
have learned the fighter’s secret: 
It’s not about who is the strongest. 
It’s about who will never quit.



--- PAGE 29

02
2 7
Your Mutant
APPEARANCE
Choose from the options below or decide for 
yourself.
 K Face: broken nose, dead eyes, scarred head, 
welding mask, hockey mask, metal jaw.
 K Body: scarred, muscular, compact, wiry, huge, 
arm prosthesis
 K Clothing: worn leather coat, dirty coverall, 
undersized T-shirt, cut-up car tires, hubcaps
TALENTS
Choose one, you can learn more later. Talents are 
explained in Chapter 4.
 K Barge Through
 K Mean Streak
 K Sucker Punch
RELATIONSHIPS TO OTHER PCs
Choose from the options below or decide for 
yourself.
 … wa
s still standing after one of your punches.
 … fo
ught by your side. 
 … left y
ou to die.
 … is 
wonderful. Some day he/she will be yours.
RELATIONSHIPS TO NPCs
Choose from the options below or decide for 
yourself.
You hate:
 K The Boss Johammed, who killed your previ-
ous Boss and tortured you.
 K The Enforcer Elon, the only one who beat you 
in a fair fight.
 K The Fixer Milix, who you think stole your 
stash of grub.
You need to protect:
 K The Boss Marlotte, who provides grub for you.
 K The Chronicler Astrina, whom you secretly 
desire.
 K Nobody. No one in this rotten world deserves 
to live.
YOUR BIG DREAM
Choose from the options below or decide for 
yourself.
 K To crush everything that is pretty.
 K That your beloved will love you back.
 K To build rather than destroy.
GEAR
You start the game with D6 bullets, 2D6 rations of 
grub and D6 rations of water.
Choose one of these starting weapons:  Spiked bat, 
brass knuckles (light weapon), scrap axe (heavy 
weapon). You can buy extra gear with your bullets.
Typical Names:  Hugust, Lenny, Marl, 
Pontis, Otiak, Ingrit, Mubba, Nelma, 
Rebeth
Key Attribute:  Strength
Specialist Skill:  Intimidate



--- PAGE 30

02
2 8
Player’s Section
GEARHEAD
For other people, the Zone is an empty 
wasteland, littered with useless scrap and 
garbage. For you, it’s a gold mine that is 
never depleted. There are remains from 
the Old Age everywhere, broken 
technical wonders. You have mas-
tered the art of turning them 
into new, working contrap-
tions. They’re not pretty. But 
they work. Most of the time. 
And the People have learned to 
value your craft.



