--- PAGE 189

13
1 8 7
Threats in the Zone
e ffect:  Give the players a chance to notice that something 
is amiss, such as a number of cadavers on the ground or a 
pipe leaking green sludge. Anyone who proceeds despite the 
warning signs suffers one Rot Point per minute in the area.
ROT WIND
A wind carrying foul Rot-ridden fumes sweep across 
the sector. The air is filled by dust and a sickening 
stench.
e ffect:  The Rot Wind immediately inflicts one Rot Points on 
every person caught in it. In addition, any water or grub car-
ried by the PCs will be contaminated by Rot, inflicting one Rot 
Point per ration consumed. The Rot Wind lasts D6 hours.
SINKHOLE
The ground suddenly gives in, and a huge hole into 
the ground or into some ancient underground facil-
ity opens up.
e ffect:  Anyone close to the collapse must make a Move roll to 
avoid falling into the Sinkhole. Doing so inflicts one point of 
damage in itself – and can expose the victim to any number 
of underground threats, such as monsters or Rot. Climbing up 
can also be difficult, usually requiring a Move roll.
TEMPERATURE DROP
Suddenly, the wind picks up, the temperature drops 
and a heavy snowfall starts. Then, the wind and 
the snowing stops. A wall of white clouds forms 
a tall cylinder right above the PCs. A crystal blue 
sky can be seen above. The serenity comes with a 
cost – the temperature drops dramatically. Exposure 
can be lethal.
e ffect:  Any Zone travelers caught out in the open must imme-
diately roll to Endure severe cold (page 93). One roll every 
15 minutes is required, until the cold spot passes (after D6 
hours) or the PCs move out of the sector. Lighting a fire can 
keep the cold at bay, but it requires firewood and an Agility 
roll (no skill used).
Comment:  Use this phenomenon only in winter. In 
the summertime, use Heat Wave instead.
±0
±0
±0
UNEXPLODED ORDNANCE
This entire area is scarred by gunshots and explo-
sions. In the ground, mines and/ or unexploded gre-
nades and bombs are hidden. Walking through this 
area is very dangerous.
e ffect:  Anyone who walks through the area must make a 
Move roll. Failure means triggering a Blast Power 6 explo-
sion at Arm’s Length (page 94).
VACUUM
The

--- PAGE 190





--- PAGE 191

14
1 8 9
ARTIFACTS
14
ARTIFACTS
Artifacts are the most valuable things the PCs can 
find. These rare functional items from the Old Age 
can give them power over other mutants, bring 
knowledge to the People, and even show the way 
to Eden.
The text on all of the Artifact Cards in the Mu-
tant: Year Zero Card Deck  is repeated here, and 
some of the more intricate artifacts are described 
in more detail.
How PCs can find and understand how to use 
artifacts is explained in Chapter 8.
HANDLING ARTIFACTS
You as GM decide when and where a PC may find 
an artifact. When the PCs explore a new sector in 
the Zone a Stalker can use the Find the Path skill to 
find artifacts, but remember that you are not bound 
by this roll. You can also let the PCs find artifacts in 
other places, like in a settlement or carried by an NPC.
Use artifacts as a reward for exploration, but 
also to create drama and tension within and around 
the group of PCs. Artifacts are powerful and valu-
able things – whoever finds an artifact will gain 
influence over others, but also risks becoming a 
target for NPCs or other PCs.
THE ARTIFACT CARDS
Normally, you let the player who finds an artifact 
draw an Artifact Card or roll on the artifact table 
below. If you want to root the artifact more firmly 
in the environment, you can draw the card without 
showing it and describe the surroundings, before 
handing the card over. A third option is that you 
simply choose which artifact a PC finds.
The title on the Artifact Card (or the entry on 
the table) tells you what the artifact is, while the rest 
of the text describes the item without mentioning 
its name. When a PC gets an Artifact Card, have the 
player first read the description without revealing 
the headline. It’s fun for the other players to guess 
what the artifact is before it is revealed. That the 
players realize what an artifact is doesn’t mean that 
the PCs do.
THE ARTIFACT TABLE
If you don’t have access to the Mutant: Year 
Zero Card Deck , you can roll D666 on this 
table instead of drawing a card to randomly 
determine what artifact a PC finds.
D666 a rt ifact
111–114 Air Mattress
115–122 Antidepressants
123–126 Assault Rifle
131–1

--- PAGE 192

14
1 9 0
GAmemaster’s Section
D666 a rt ifact
135–142 Battery
143–146 Bicycle
151–154 Binoculars
155–162 Bow & Arrow
163–166 Canoe
211–214 Cassette Player (Metaplot)
215–222 Chainsaw
223–226 Comic Book
231–234 Compass
235–242 Crossbow
243–246 Diary
251–254 Diving Gear
255–262 Dress
263–266 Energy Pills
311–314 Flashlight
315–322 Flare Gun
323–326 Gas Mask
331–334 Generator
335–342 Guitar
343–346 Hand Grenade
351–354 Hockey Helmet
355–362 Hunting Rifle
363–366 ID Card (Metaplot)
411–414 Jerrycan
415–422 Katana
423–426 Kevlar Vest
431–434 Lifestyle Magazine
435–442 Map of the Zone
443–446 Motor Boat
451–454 Painkillers
455–462 Painting
463–466 Perfume Bottle
511–514 Protective Suit
515–522 REGEN
523–526 Revolver
531–534 Scooter
535–542 Semi-Automatic Pistol
543–546 Shotgun
551–554 Smoke Grenade
D666 a rt ifact
555–562 Soda Can
563–566 Stimulants
611–614 Sunglasses
615–622 Tuxedo
623–626 Umbrella
631–634 Video Camera (Metaplot)
635–642 Wrench
643–666 Re-Roll
THE DAWN VAULT
Any mutant who finds an artifact is supposed to 
hand it over to the Dawn Vault, for the good of the 
People (page 113). These days, far from all mutants 
follow that rule, but the general principle is still 
there and helps the development of the Ark – each 
artifact handed in gives a bonus to the Ark’s DEV 
level. Use this to place PCs in moral dilemmas – 
should they help themselves or act for the common 
good?
KK AIR MATTRESS
This inflatable old bed offers unbeatable sleeping 
comfort! It’s dirty and worn, and hard to inflate if 
you don’t know how to do it.
Effect: Sleeping on the air mattress is very effec-
tive. A single hour is enough to recover all of 
your lost Wits (page 90).
DEV Requirement: Technology 10  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
KK ANTIDEPRESSANTS
When life in the Zone feels dark and hopeless, these 
little pills in a plastic bottle can give you chemical 
relief.
Effect: When eating these pills, you immediately 
heal all doubt that you have suffered. Unfor-
tunately, there are only enough pills left for 
D6 doses. When you have consumed them all, 
you must discard this artifact. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20  
DEV 
Bonus: —



--- PAGE 193

14
1 9 1
ARTIFACTS
KK ASSAULT RIFLE
A rusty but awe-inspiring weapon, capable of un-
leashing a hail of bullets at your enemies. Bullets 
are usually far too valuable to waste in this way, 
but the weapon itself will give you respect among 
the People.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to Shoot. Weapon dam-
age 2, Long range. Has a clip, which means 
that you don’t need to reload after every shot. 
Capable of full automatic fire (page 86).
DEV Requirement: Technology 20 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +D6
KK AUTOMOBILE
This motor-driven carriage is s rust-ridden wreck, 
but it can be repaired. With a successful Jury-Rig 
roll, a Gearhead can get it running again. The en-
gine can run on gasoline or on booze (one dose per 
Zone sector traveled).
Effect: The car can carry five mutants, increases 
the movement rate in combat and cuts the 
time it takes to explore a sector in the Zone 
by half. It can also be used to escape from 
threats or to ram enemies. How vehicles work 
is fully explained on page 94. Gear Bonus: +3. 
Armor Rating: 3. Resilience: 1.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK BATTERY
A heavy lump of metal that the Old Ones used to 
connect to machines to make them work. There still 
seems to be some power in it…
Effect: Used to power other artifacts that require 
electrical power. Can be recharged with a 
Generator (the artifact or the project).
DEV Requirement: Technology 10  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
KK BICYCLE
This rust-infested old vehicle from the Old Age is 
simple yet ingenious in its design. It has two thin 
wheels, a handlebar and pedals. The rubber tires 
are thick and rugged – perfect for navigating the 
Zone terrain.
Effect: The bicycle can carry one mutant, in-
creases the movement rate in combat and 
cuts the time it takes to explore a sector in 
the Zone by half. It can also be used to es-
cape from threats. How vehicles work is fully 
explained on page 94. Gear Bonus: +2. Resil-
ience: 1.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK BINOCULARS
A strange metal object made of two connected tubes 
with pieces of glass inside each. If you look through 
the tubes, everything around you looks much big-
ger. Us

--- PAGE 194

14
1 9 2
GAmemaster’s Section
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Scout and Find the 
Path skills. Light item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK BOW & ARROW
The People can create bows, but not like this one. 
It is constructed in some type of ancient material, 
and packs a massive punch.
Effect: Gear Bonus +2 to the Shoot skill. Weapon 
damage 1, Long range. Needs arrows.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV Bonus: Technology +1, Warfare +1
KK CANOE
A strange, oblong vehicle made of dented metal. It 
has two seats and two plastic paddles tucked away 
underneath.
Effect: The canoe can carry up to four mutants 
over water and can be used to explore coastal 
sectors of the Zone. It can be used to escape 
from threats on water, and gives a +2 Gear 
Bonus to the Move skill in such situations. 
Resilience: 1.
DEV Requirement: —
 
 
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +1
KK CASSETTE PLAYER (METAPLOT)
A cracked and yellowed plastic contraption with 
buttons and knobs and a lid along one side. Inside, 
there is a piece of plastic with two holes in it. On 
top of the device a thin metal rod is mounted.
Effect: Requires a Battery or Generator (the arti-
fact or the project) to work. Can play music 
from the Old Age and receive radio signals, if 
anyone is still transmitting…
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Culture +D6
Comment: This artifact can help the PCs find 
Eden. Read more in Chapter 16.
KK CHAINSAW
This rattling monster of a contraption can be 
wielded as a melee weapon to horrible effect. But 
starting the engine takes a full turn and requires a 
dose of gasoline or booze.
Effect: Wielded as a weapon, the chainsaw gives 
you a +2 Gear Bonus and has weapon damage 
3. Heavy item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK COMIC BOOK
A booklet made of brittle old paper from the Old 
Age. You can hardly turn the yellowed pages with-
out tearing them apart. They show images of mus-
cular men and women in tights, fighting each other. 
The fashion sense during the Old Age was clearly 
very odd.
Effect: None. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK COMPASS
A piece of plastic with a dial on it. A needle spins 
and points i

--- PAGE 195

14
1 9 3
ARTIFACTS
Effect: The compass gives you Gear Bonus +2 to 
the Find the Path skill.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK CROSSBOW
A silent and deadly ancient weapon, made of a 
light-weight metal. Easier to aim and fire than a 
normal bow.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Shoot skill. Weapon 
damage 1, Long range. Uses arrows, not 
bullets.
DEV Requirement: Technology 5
DEV Bonus: Technology +1, Warfare +1
KK DIARY
A worn notebook with hand-written text on the 
waterlogged pages. If you can read the Old Ones’ 
script, you can make out what it says.
Effect: This artifact connects to the game’s meta-
plot. Read more about it in Chapter 16.
DEV Requirement: Culture 20  
DEV 
Bonus: Culture +D6
KK DIVING GEAR
A full-body suit in a rubbery material from the Old 
Age. The strange suit comes with shoes like the 
feet of a frog, a plastic facemask and a rusted metal 
cylinder with tubes and gauges.
Effect: Heavy item. It gives you Gear Bonus +3 
to using the Move skill underwater. It also 
HOW MANY ARTIFACTS?
Don’t let the PCs find too many artifacts 
too soon. Artifacts should be rare and val-
uable. As a general rule, don’t let the PCs 
find more than one or two artifacts per 
session, in total. You can let some NPCs 
have artifacts, but that should also be a 
rare occurrence – NPCs’ artifacts have a 
tendency to end up in the hands of the 
PCs. And if the PCs still would come a 
across a large amount of artifacts – re-
member that others will try to get their 
hands on them…
protects you against gases and gives you 
Protection Rating 3 against the Rot.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK DRESS
A large and wide piece of clothing in thin, ancient 
cloth that still glitters despite decades of dirt and 
dust. The cloth hardly covers your upper body at 
all, but hangs around your legs and makes it hard 
to walk. Very impractical – but pretty.
Effect: Gear Bonus +2 to Manipulate. Does not 
count as an item when you wear it.
DEV Requirement: Culture 10
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK ENERGY PILLS
The pills in this bottle will quickly give you your 
energy back when you’re exhausted.
Effect: When eating these pills, you immediate

--- PAGE 196

14
1 9 4
GAmemaster’s Section
KK GAS MASK
This crusty old black rubber mask covers your en-
tire face and has a big filter in front of your mouth. 
The mask is worn and scratched, but still works.
Effect: Light item. Protects you against gases and 
gives you Protection rating 3 against the Rot.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
KK GENERATOR
A heavy, rusty old machine that seems completely 
worthless at first glance. But a Gearhead knows that 
this contraption is worth its weight in gold. If you 
fill it up with fuel it can generate electrical power.
Effect: Heavy item. Requires one dose of booze 
per day. Can power other artifacts or projects.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK GUITAR
A strange and brittle wooden contraption with 
strings stretched across a hole in the middle. 
Against all odds it has survived the Apocalypse 
with hardly a scratch, and if you pull on the strings, 
beautiful sounds are heard.
Effect: If you learn to play the guitar, you’ll be 
popular around the campfire. Provides +3 
Gear Bonus to Manipulate, but only in situa-
tions where you get a chance to play.
DEV Requirement: Culture 20  
DEV 
Bonus: Culture +D6
KK HAND GRENADE
A rusty metal lump that explodes with a deafening 
bang if you pull the pin out. Handle with caution!
Effect: Light item. You throw the grenade using 
the Shoot skill. It has no Gear Bonus and the 
range is Short. If the attack succeeds, the gre-
nade lands within Near range of the target, if 
not it lands within Short range. The explosion 
has Blast Power 9 and weapon damage 2.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +D6
KK HOCKEY HELMET
An ancient piece of headgear made of blue plastic. 
It’s a little cracked and worn, but still provides solid 
protection for your head.
Effect: Protection Rating 3 against damage.
DEV Requirement: —
 
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +1
KK HUNTING RIFLE
This long firearm is worn and scratched, but its 
great firepower and range will make sure you are 
feared in the Zone.
Effect: Gear Bonus +2 to Shoot. Weapon damage 
2, Long range. Has a clip, which means that 
you don’t need to reload after every shot.
DEV Requir

--- PAGE 197

14
1 9 5
ARTIFACTS
Comment: This artifact can help the PCs into 
Eden. Read more in Chapter 16.
KK JERRYCAN
A rusted but intact metal jerrycan filled with fuel, 
which stinks and is very flammable. The fuel can 
power up ancient vehicles again – or be used as a 
firebomb.
Effect: The fuel can be used to fill up the tanks 
of old vehicles (page 94). If used as a weapon, 
you light a fuse stuffed into the nozzle and 
then throw the can with the Force skill. No 
Gear Bonus, Short range. If the attack suc-
ceeds, the can lands within Near range of 
the target, if not it lands at Short range. The 
explosion has Blast Power 6.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +1
KK KATANA
In a crumbling sheath lies a long, thin sword. It 
feels good in your hand and the blade is still sharp 
– very sharp.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Fight skill. Weapon 
damage 2.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK KEVLAR VEST
This heavy vest already has some holes in it, but 
still gives you great protection from bullets and 
others attacks.
Effect: Armor Rating 6 against damage from 
external attacks.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6



--- PAGE 198

14
1 9 6
GAmemaster’s Section
KK LIFESTYLE MAGAZINE
A thick bundle of waterlogged paper that once was 
glossy. On the front cover and everywhere inside 
the magazine, there are pictures of the Old Ones. 
They all smile and look healthy and happy. Their 
homes are bright and beautiful, their motor car-
riages shine in the sunlight. Between the pictures, 
texts describe what life was like in the Old Age. It 
must have been heaven.
Effect: None. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: —  
DEV 
Bonus: Culture +D6
KK MAP OF THE ZONE
This brittle and torn map shows what the Zone 
looked like in the Old Age. It is very valuable to a 
Stalker to navigate among the ruins, but can also 
bring valuable knowledge to the People.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to Find the Path. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: Culture 10
 
DEV 
Bonus: Culture +D6
KK MOTOR BOAT
A dinghy in cracked and dirty plastic. It still seems 
to float. It has an outboard motor, but to make it 
run again a Gearhead needs to make a Jury-Rig 
roll. The motor can run on gasoline or booze (one 
dose per sector traveled in the Zone).
Effect: The boat can carry up to seven mutants, 
increases the movement speed in combat 
and cuts the time it takes to explore a coastal 
Zone sector by half. It can also be used to 
escape from threats or to ram enemies at sea. 
How vehicles work is fully explained on page 
94. Gear Bonus: +3. Resilience: 2.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
KK PAINKILLERS
These little pills quickly numb the pain from your 
wounds and bruises.
Effect: On eating these pills, you immediately 
heal all damage points that you have suffered. 
They have no effect against critical injuries. 
There are only enough pills left for D6 doses. 
When you have consumed them all, you must 
discard this artifact. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20 
 
DEV 
Bonus: —
KK PAINTING
A large piece of art in a wooden frame. The image 
shows a skinny man on a bridge, holding his hands 
to his face and screaming. The Old Ones were truly 
a strange lot. This artifact is of no obvious use, but 
you can always use it to adorn the walls in your 
den – or hand it in to the Dawn Vault.
Effect: None.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV

--- PAGE 199

14
1 9 7
ARTIFACTS
KK REVOLVER
A gun made of heavy steel, resting comfortably in 
your hand. The weapon is a little rusty, but still in 
surprisingly good condition. It’s easy to use too.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Shoot skill. Weapon 
damage 2, Short range. Has a drum that can 
be loaded with several bullets, so you don’t 
need to reload after every bullet fired.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +1
KK SCOOTER
Two wheels, an engine and a rusted handle – the 
perfect Zone vehicle. To make the scooter opera-
tional a Gearhead must first make a roll for the 
Jury-Rig skill. The engine can run on gasoline or 
on booze (one dose per two Zone sectors traveled).
Effect: The scooter can carry two mutants, in-
creases the movement speed in combat and 
cuts the time it takes to explore a sector in 
the Zone by half. It can also be used to es-
cape from threats or to ram enemies. How 
vehicles work is fully explained on page 94. 
Gear Bonus: +2. Resilience: 1.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK SEMI-AUTOMATIC PISTOL
A light-weight and easily concealable handgun, 
small enough to hide in your sleeve. Very handy 
in a tight spot.
Effect: Light item. Gear Bonus +2 to the Shoot 
skill. Weapon damage 2, Short range. Has a 
clip, meaning you don’t need to reload after 
every shot.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +1
KK SHOTGUN
A sawed-off firearm with two heavy barrels. At close 
range it is a fearsome weapon that inspires awe in 
every mutant in the Ark.
Effect: Light item. Gear Bonus +3 to the Shoot 
skill. Weapon damage 3, Short range. Can be 
fired twice before it needs to be reloaded.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +1
KK SMOKE GRENADE
With a hissing noise, this old metal tube spews 
out black smoke that blocks vision. You can use 
this effect to escape from a fight that is going 
against you.
Effect: You can use the smoke grenade to escape 
from conflict (page 81) instead of using the 
Move skill. You can even roll first and use the 
grenade if the roll fails.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +1, Warfare +1
KK SODA CAN
A red

--- PAGE 200

14
1 9 8
GAmemaster’s Section
KK STIMULANTS
These tiny white pills look unimposing, but if you 
eat them they will immediately sharpen your senses 
and make you very alert. You might not sleep for 
a few days though.
Effect: When eating these pills, you immediately 
heal all confusion points that you have suf-
fered. There are only enough pills left for D6 
doses. When you have consumed them all, 
you must discard this artifact. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: —
KK SUNGLASSES
A pair of glasses with darkened lenses. The glass is 
scratched but intact and covers your eyes – a useful 
edge in tough negotiations.
Effect: Gear Bonus to the Manipulate and Intimi-
date skills. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV Bonus: Culture + 1
KK TUXEDO
A set of clothes with a black jacket, pants and a shirt. 
On the front of the shirt, a wrinkled strip of cloth 
hangs. These ancient clothes will impress everyone 
around you.
Effect: Gear Bonus +2 to Manipulate. Does not 
count as an item when you wear it.
DEV Requirement: Culture 10
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK UMBRELLA
With a simple motion you can unfold this contrap-
tion to create a protective dome of cloth and metal 
– useful against the Rot and the acid rain in the Zone.
Effect: Protection Rating 3 against the Rot (page 
126).
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK VIDEO CAMERA (METAPLOT)
A fist-sized device with a tube at one end. Along the 
side, there are several buttons and a small screen 
that can be folded out. This contraption needs a 
Generator or a Battery to work (artifact or project).
Effect: This device can record moving images 
and sound. Perhaps something is already 
recorded on it?
DEV Requirement: Technology 30  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
Comment: This artifact can help the PCs find the 
way to Eden. Read more in Chapter 16.
KK WRENCH
A heavy metal tool from the Old Age, rusted but 
worth its weight in gold for Gearheads. Useful for 
bludgeoning other mutants too.



--- PAGE 201

14
1 9 9
ARTIFACTS
w ea P on b on u S Da M ag e r an ge c o MM en t
Assault Rifle +3 2 Long Clip, Full-Auto.
Chainsaw +2 3 Arm’s Length Heavy item.
Compound Bow +2 1 Long
Crossbow +3 1 Long
Flare Gun +2 2 Short
Hunting Rifle +2 2 Long Clip.
Katana +3 2 Arm’s Length
Revolver +3 2 Short Clip.
Semi-Auto Pistol +2 2 Short Clip, light item.
Shotgun +2 3 Short Two barrels.
v ehicle b on u S a r M or r e S il ience o cc u P an t S
Bicycle  +2 * —  1  1
Sc
ooter +2 —  1  2
Mo
torcycle +3 —  1  2
Bu
ggy +2 2  2  3
Au
tomobile +3 3  2  5
Bu
s +2 3  5 40
T
ruck +2 6  5  4
St
eam Car (page 111) +1 3  3 10
C
anoe  +2
* —  1  4
Mo
torboat +3 1  2  7
Sc
rap Ship (page 109)  +1
* 6 20 50
Steam Train (page 112)  +1
* 3 15 50
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Jury-Rig skill and +2 
to the Fight skill. Weapon damage 1.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
OTHER ARTIFACTS
There are 50 artifacts in this book. Considering that 
the PCs shouldn’t find more than one or two arti-
facts per session, these 50 should suffice for quite a 
number of sessions. More artifacts will be published 
in future expansions, and you are of course free to 
make up more yourself – just be careful not to make 
them too powerful.
WEAPONS & VEHICLES
Weapons and vehicles are two types of artifacts that 
are especially sought after in the dawnworld. Some 
are included in the Artifact Cards. These and others 
can be found in the tables below.
Bonus:  The number of Gear Dice that a weapon 
gives to the Shoot or Fight skill, and a vehicle gives 
to the Move or the Fight skill (when ramming an 
enemy, see page 95). Some vehicles cannot be used 
to ram – these are marked with an asterisk (*).
Resilience: The number of points of damage that 
needs to be inflicted on a vehicle before its Gear 
Bonus is reduced one step.
Armor:  The Armor Rating that the vehicle provides 
to all passengers in the vehicle.
Occupants:  The number of people who can fit into 
or onto the vehicle, including the driver.



--- PAGE 202





--- PAGE 203

15
2 0 1
Special Zone Sectors
15
Special 
Zone Sectors
This chapter describes five Special Zone Sectors 
that you can place anywhere in the Zone. They 
are complete scenario locations and contain 
NPCs, conflicts and the events that PCs can get 
involved in.
Each Special Zone Sector stands on its own, 
but you can link them together to create longer 
scenarios if you like. Several of them are also con-
nected to Threat Cards (Chapter 10), and some of 
them have suggestions about where clues to Eden 
can be placed for the PCs to find. Each Special 
Zone Sector has a map overview, shown in two 
versions:
 K The GM map has small inset pictures show-
ing the important locations in the sector.
 K The player map lacks these inset pictures, 
and can therefore be shown to the players 
openly when the PCs arrive to the sector. The 
player maps sit at the end of the chapter, and 
can also be downloaded from the Modiphius 
website.
FOR A MOUTHFUL OF WATER
The lack of grub and Rot-free water is an ever 
present threat in Mutant: Year Zero . This Special 
Zone Sector is focused on the second of these two 
vital resources. Somewhere out in the Zone there 
is a rich source of clean water, worth more than its 
weight in gold to the People – and to other groups 
in the Zone.
This sector can be used early in your campaign, 
as it introduces several central elements of the 
game: the shortage of resources, the Zone-Ghouls 
and the search for Eden. This Special Zone Sector 
can even be used as the starting point for the entire 
game (see the boxed text).
INTRODUCTORY SCENARIO
For a Mouthful of Water works well as an 
introduction to Mutant: Year Zero . The game 
then doesn’t start in the Ark, but rather with 
the PCs already on a Zone expedition. Pick 



--- PAGE 204

15
2 0 2
GAmemaster's Section
a sector on the Zone map 5–6 squares away 
from the Ark – that’s where the PCs are when 
the game starts. Add one or two NPCs to the 
expedition too. If none of the PCs are a Dog 
Handler and none have the Tracker mutation, 
an NPC should have that role or mutation. To 
kick the game off, read or paraphrase this 
text to your players:
“The most precious resource of all in the Ark 
is something that we take for granted – clean 
water. Some time ago, the Ark’s water supply 
started to dry up. The People were getting 
scared and edgy. Two weeks ago, the Boss 
NN [insert the name of a Boss that the players 
have established during the character gen-
eration] decided to send an expedition into 
the Zone. The mission was meant to explore 
an ancient ruin that the Stalkers claim has an 
endless supply of clean water. They called it 
the Pure Plant. The problem was that the area 
was crawling with Zone-Ghouls. Several days 
passed, but the expedition did not return as 
planned. Two days ago, NN sent out another 
group of volunteers to search for the first expe-
dition. You are these volunteers. For the past 
two days, you have trekked through the Zone. 
You have survived acid rain, been attacked 
by Zone Rats and hidden from Zone-Ghouls. 
Now, on the morning of the third day, you are 
approaching the Pure Plant…”
OVERVIEW
In the distance, huge tanks and thick rusty pipes 
rise from the wasteland. In the middle is a tall, con-
crete tower, still standing after decades of decay. 
When the PCs come closer, they realize the Pure 
Plant is located on a small island in a mist-covered 
lake (or bay, depending on where in the Zone you 
have placed the sector). The island is about 100 
yards from the shoreline. Apart from the tanks, 
pipes and pools, several low ruined buildings can be 
seen on the island, which is overgrown with weeds.
In the Old Age, this installation was a water pu-
rification plant. The entire island is penetrated by 
tunnels and underground reservoirs with water of dif-
ferent Rot levels. Thanks to maintenance work done 
by the Zone-Ghouls (below) the plant actually still 
works, and still pumps out clean water into the lake.


--- PAGE 205

15
2 0 3
Special Zone Sectors
Tunnels:  Service tunnels penetrate the entire island. 
Having lived here for years, the Zone-Ghouls know 
these passages very well. There is a tunnel leading 
from the control room building to the reservoirs, 
but the water expedition members have not dared 
go down there. In this tunnel, there is a solid metal 
door that can be closed and locked with a success-
ful Force roll.
THE SITUATION
When the Apocalypse came, the purification plant 
stayed operational, thanks to an internal emergency 
power plant and a group of workers who chose to 
stay. Thanks to the clean water they survived, but 
they could not completely escape the Rot. During 
the generations that followed, they turned into what 
the People now call Zone-Ghouls. They are very ter-
ritorial and their leader Lutrell views any visitors 
to the island as threats.
The first water expedition from the Ark got into 
trouble the instant they set foot on the island. Their 
leader, the Stalker Vorhan, was attacked by the 
Trash Hawk and carried off to the nest at the top of 
the smokestack. The noise alerted the Zone-Ghouls, 
who attacked the intruders. After a brief but bloody 
battle the visitors sought refuge in the control room, 
where they have now barricaded themselves and 
don’t dare go out. The Zone-Ghouls are planning 
a final attack.
INHABITANTS
Today approximately 50 Zone-Ghouls live on the 
island, half adults and half children. Most of them 
have typical stats (page 176), only their leader 
Lutrell is described in more detail below. The water 
FAMILIAR NPCs?
If you like, you can replace the three 
NPCs from the first water expedition with 
NPCs that the PCs have relationships to. 
This will make the interaction more inter-
esting. If this is the first time these NPCs 
appear in the game, you can just change 
their names and use the stats as written.
expedition from the Ark has been decimated since 
it arrived to the island – the leader Vorhan was taken 
by the Trash Hawk, and two others were killed by 
the Zone-Ghouls. The three that remain – Nelma, 
Grit and Lambda – are scared and very hostile to 
the Zone-Ghouls.
Nelma: After Vorhan’s death, the Enforcer Nelma 


--- PAGE 206

15
T HE  R ESERVOIRS
2 0 4
GAmemaster's Section
The Pure Plant
Lutrell  is the leader of the Zone-Ghouls on the 
island, who call themselves the “Pure Ones”. 
Lutrell is a man who lives and dies by upholding 
the ancient traditions: the daily water measure-
ments with litmus paper, the bathing in Tank 3A 
every evening, the cleaning of the water filters. 
Traditions have kept the Pure Ones alive and will 
continue to do so, Lutrell believes. Intruders on 
the island are not welcome. However, Lutrell is no 
fanatic. If the PCs try to negotiate with him, he 
might make a deal. He can even consider giving 
the People access to the clean water – if given 
something substantial in return, of course. The 
Pure Ones all wear worn plastic coveralls, and 
most of them use protective face masks whenever 
they leave the reservoirs.
a ttributes:  Strength 3, Agility 3, Wits 5, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Fight 2, Shoot 3, Move 2, Manipulate 2.
g ea
r:  Scrap knife, bow (seven arrows), old litmus papers, 
torn wetsuit.
The Trash Hawk  has its nest at the top of the 
smokestack, but it’s often out hunting. Normal stats 
(page 181).
The Worm Swarm in the pool hall is a huge speci-
men with a starting Strength score of 10. Otherwise 
it has typical stats (page 181). The Zone-Ghouls 
worship this beast, which they call the “Deep One”. 
Every week they sacrifice animals to it.
The Woman in the Tower: In the nest of the Trash 
Hawk, bones and other remains of the bird’s prey of 
are scattered, including the fresh corpse of Vorhan. 
One of the old skeletons is fairly intact, and still 
dressed in old and hacked up coveralls with strange 
markings. A PC who examines the skeleton and 
makes a Know the Zone roll, will realize that this 
is a skeleton of a non-mutated human woman. In 
her pocket, a waterlogged and yellowed diary can 
be found – it is still legible. This diary is an artifact 
that provides information about Eden. You can read 
more about it in Chapter 16.



--- PAGE 207

15
T HE  S MOKESTACK
T HE  C ON
TROL  RO
OM
2 0 5
Special Zone Sectors




--- PAGE 208

15
2 0 6
GAmemaster's Section
GEAR & ARTIFACTS
 K The members of the first water expedition 
have no grub or water at all, and are getting 
desperate.
 K Among the gory remains of the Stalker 
Vorhan’s body in the Trash Hawk’s nest, the 
PCs may find a scrap rifle (twin barrels, Gear 
Bonus +2), six bullets, three rations of canned 
food, five rations of clean water in plastic bot-
tles and one random artifact.
 K The dead woman in the nest on the smoke-
stack has the Diary artifact.
 K The Zone-Ghouls have dozens grub rations, 
but are not likely to share them with the PCs. 
Much of this grub is contaminated by Rot. 
The Zone-Ghouls have 1–2 random artifacts 
in their possession.
 K In the reservoirs there is a practically endless 
supply of clean water – the PCs just need to 
make sure they drink from the right vats…
EVENTS
 K The PCs are attacked by Zone-Ghouls soon 
after they set foot on the island. The Zone-
Ghouls are as many as the PCs, and try to 
ambush them (page 82). As soon as one of 
them suffers damage, they will retreat. They 
are not trying to kill the PCs (yet), just warn-
ing them and testing their mettle. If the fight 
goes very badly for the PCs, Nelma and her 
crew may come to the rescue.
 K The PCs find the remains of the first water 
expedition: Nelma, Grit and Lambda. They 
demand grub and water. They say that there 
are Zone-Ghouls on the island and want the 
PCs’ help to kill them or chase them off. First, 
Nelma wants someone to climb the smoke-
stack to see if their leader Vorhan is still alive. 
Nelma says that a “flying monster” grabbed 
him and flew off. Vorhan had grub and valu-
able artifacts that must be retrieved.
 K In the nest at the top of the smokestack 
the PCs will find Vorhan very much dead – 
hacked to pieces by the Trash Hawk. Among 
the remains, the PCs may find plenty of 
useful gear (above). Make sure the PCs also 
find the Diary on the dead woman. Nelma 



--- PAGE 209

15
2 0 7
Special Zone Sectors
demands that the PCs hand over everything 
they found in the nest, including the Diary. 
She will pass everything on to the Boss NN, 
she says.
 K The Trash Hawk attacks. The bird can strike 
when the PCs are up in the nest, on their way 
down, or at some other dramatically appropri-
ate time. The Trash Hawk can also attack the 
Zone-Ghouls. The bird will generally fly off 
when wounded and return later.
 K Nelma wants to attack the Zone-Ghouls head 
on, and secure the clean water in the pool 
halls. She demands that the PCs take part in 
the attack. Without the water in the pools the 
People are doomed, she says.
 K Lutrell leads a delegation to talk to the intrud-
ers. He is wary of the mutants’ powers and 
makes sure he stays at Short range. If the PCs 
can understand him (a Comprehend roll), he 
will make it clear that he offers them safe pas-
sage off the island with as much clean water 
as they can carry. In return, he wants their 
firearms and a vow that the People will never 
come back to this place. Nelma will never ac-
cept the deal, and the situation could escalate 
into violence.
 K The Zone-Ghouls attack in full force. This will 
only happen when Lutrell feels truly threat-
ened. The Zone-Ghouls greatly outnumber 
the intruders, who would do wisely to flee or 
negotiate – unless the PCs have very power-
ful artifacts or lots of Mutation Points.
 K Any violence in the pool halls wakes the 
Worm Swarm, which attacks everyone nearby. 
The Zone-Ghouls run for their lives from the 
Deep One. If the PCs have the right muta-
tions or powerful weapons they might be able 
to defeat the monster. The Zone-Ghouls have 
long feared the monster, and this event will 
make them very grateful to the PCs.
THE OTHER ARK
Sooner or later the People will realize that they are 
not the only mutants in the Zone – there are other 
Arks. All Arks share the same origin (Chapter 16), 
but have developed in very different directions over 
the years. Some have simply collapsed. This Special 
Zone Sector is an Ark that has survived – in its 
very own way.
The PCs can find their way here by chance or 
be led here as the result of a Threat Card or an 

--- PAGE 210

15
THE CHAIRMAN’S SUITE
THE ARTIFACT STOREROOM
2 0 8
GAmemaster's Section
The other Ark



--- PAGE 211

15
HAND-CRANKED ELEVATOR
PUSHWHEEL CONNECTED TO GENERATOR
SLAUGHTERHOUSE
CAGES FOR THE “GIVERS”
2 0 9
Special Zone Sectors
themselves. The second thing that the PCs will 
soon notice is that it is the women who call the 
shots around here – the men are underlings and 
slaves.
After having been gawked at by the children 
and guardedly greeted by the adults, the guests will 
be stripped of their clothes and scrubbed with hot 
water – a rather heavy-handed Rot decontamination 
(page 126). They are then offered grub, as much as 
they want, of some kind of dried meat. Any ques-
tions – about the meat or anything else – are met 
by silence or answers “not to worry about it”. The 
PCs hear about the “Chairman”, who seems to be 
the ruler of this Ark and is mentioned with deep 
reverence and respect. Some call him “the source 
of all life”.
The PCs are free to move around inside the set-
tlement, except for the basement and the Chair-
man’s penthouse (below), but are constantly being 
watched. Inside the building there is even working 
electric light, but the lamps flicker and sometimes 
go out completely.
THE SITUATION
The Chairman rules this Ark as a dictator. The 
source of his power is that he – and only he – can 
father children with the women of the Ark. All other 
men and women here are barren to each other, just 
like the People in the PCs’ own Ark. The explana-
tion behind this is that the Chairman is no mutant. 
He is a Zone-Ghoul who was adopted by Eden sci-
entists in this Ark at a young age – so long ago that 
none of the inhabitants remember it (or do they?). 
As a consequence of this, all other men in the Ark 
are treated like slaves (or worse, see below).
In this Ark, starvation set in much earlier than 
in the PCs’ Ark. To survive, the inhabitants went 
out into the Zone and started to hunt – and eat – 
Zone-Ghouls, who are numerous in this area. The 
hunting raids triggered violent counterattacks. A 
low-intensity war has now been raging for years 
between the Zone-Ghouls and the Chairman’s Ark.
When the Zone-Ghouls no longer were enough 
to feed the inhabitants – and the increasing number 
of children – the Chairman decreed that the men 
of the settl

--- PAGE 212

15
2 1 0
GAmemaster's Section
on. Many of the men are now dubbed “Givers” and 
work hard as slaves until they are butchered and 
eaten. But the number of Givers is running low, and 
discontent is simmering. When the Chairman hears 
about the PCs and their Ark he sees a new source 
of food for his ever-growing flock of children…
INHABITANTS
In this Ark, there are NPCs with the same roles as 
in the PCs own Ark – create stats for typical inhabit-
ants just like you would in the Ark (page 139). Stats 
for a few important NPCs follow below.
The Chairman  is consumed by his desire for power 
and control. He views himself as a divine being. He 
is skinny and pale, and wears a black robe and a 
hood to protect his translucent skin against the sun 
– which hurts him just like it does all Zone-Ghouls 
(page 176). The Chairman’s goal is to find a new 
source of grub for his children.
a ttributes:  Strength 3, Agility 4, Wits 5, Empathy 5. 
Skills:  Fight 2, Move 3, Shoot 4, Manipulate 5. 
g ea
r:  Revolver (artifact, 5 bullets).
Rebeth:  An Enforcer who is blindly loyal to the 
Chairman. She is tall, wears her black hair in a long 
ponytail and has no other goal than to prove herself 
to the Chairman.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 4, Wits 2, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Fight 4, Move 2, Shoot 3.
Mutations:  Four-Armed, Extreme Reflexes, 6 MP .
g ea
r:  scrap rifle (three-barreled, 6 bullets), spiked bat.



--- PAGE 213

15
2 1 1
Special Zone Sectors
Krin: A Stalker who secretly doubts the rule of the 
Chairman. She has not dared to tell anyone else – 
but she could try to use the PCs as a catalyst for 
a revolt.
a ttributes:  Strength 3, Agility 5, Wits 4, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Move 2, Shoot 4, Heal 2, Find the Path 2. 
Mutations:  Flame Breath, 3 MP .
g ea
r:  scrap rifle (weapon damage 3, 4 bullets), scrap knife.
Dink:  Krin’s slave and companion on her Zone trav-
els. He suspects that Krin doubts the Chairman, and 
considers ratting on her in order to gain favor with 
the Chairman and be spared the fate of a Giver.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 3, Wits 2, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Fight 2, Move 2, Endure 4. 
Mutations:  Rot-Eater, 1 MP .
g ea
r:  Scrap spear, road sign (artifact).
Naphta:  A Gearhead who prefers to spend her time 
alone, delving into the mysteries of the Old Age. 
Tries to stay away from trouble, but could be re-
cruited to either side in case of a revolt.
a ttributes:  Strength 2, Agility 3, Wits 5, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Fight 1, Shoot 3, Jury-Rig 3.
Mutations:  Pathokinesis, 3 MP .
g ea
r:  Bicycle chain, scrap pistol (twin-barreled, 4 bullets).
ARTIFACTS
This Ark has a sizeable collection of scrap and arti-
facts in the tower’s basement. In a dark garage there 
are lots of broken items from the Old Age, as well as 
4–5 functional artifacts. One of the artifacts leading 
the way to Eden (Chapter 16) may be located here.
In addition, in the garage there are three ancient 
buses that have been repaired and fitted with ar-
mor plating, flamethrowers and scrap cannons by 
Naphta. These rolling fortresses are sometimes 
used for larger raids against the Zone-Ghouls, and 
could be used against the PCs’ Ark.
GRUB, WATER & BULLETS
In this Ark there is enough dried meat (below) to 
feed all inhabitants for a week. Most of it is stored 
in the basement, where there is also a broken old 
water pipe that still carries enough Rot-free water 
for everyone to drink. The female inhabitants usu-
ally carry D6 bullets each, but there is no central 
stockpile. The men (except the Chairman) have no 
guns and no bullets.
EVENTS
 K The PCs are led to meet the Chairman in 
person. Th

--- PAGE 214

15
2 1 2
GAmemaster's Section
horizontal wheel pushed around by 5–6 Givers, 
hour after hour until they collapse. In another 
cold basement room, the darkest secret of this 
Ark is hidden – a slaughterhouse where Givers 
who are too exhausted to work are butchered 
for food. The entrance to the basement is 
guarded by two Enforcers with scrap pistols. 
The escape attempt can be the spark that trig-
gers a revolt against the Chairman, and the 
PCs might get caught in the middle of it.
 K If the PCs reveal where their Ark is located, or 
if the Chairman finds out some other way (by 
having the PCs followed, for example), he will 
lead a raiding party there. The three armored 
buses (above) will roll through Zone to the 
PCs Ark. If it is wintertime, then they can 
drive across frozen rivers or lakes. The raid 
has Battle Level 3 (page 114), but the Chair-
man doesn’t attack head on – instead he be-
sieges the Ark. He demands that ten mutants 
be handed over to him as slaves. If the People 
give in to this demand the Chairman will 
leave, but come back at some later time and 
demand even more “slaves”. Any slaves given 
to the Chairman will be turned into Givers (if 
they are men) or impregnated by the Chair-
man (if they are women). Sooner or later the 
People will need to confront the Chairman 
and deal with him once and for all.
THE NOVA CULT
In the world after the Fall, many strange cults have 
appeared. The psionic sect that calls itself “Nova” 
is one of the strangest – and most dangerous of 
them all.
OVERVIEW
In a flat scrubland in the Zone, there is a large cir-
cular metal slab, ten yards across, on the ground. 
Nearby, there are a few simple wooden sheds with 
corrugated metal roofs. From inside the sheds, ani-
mals can be heard grunting and squealing. Moving 
closer, the PCs smell animal manure. A hunchback 
mutant with reptilian features walks between the 
sheds (this is Ohm, see below). Inside the sheds 
about 30 pigs are kept, all mutated and surly.
On occasion (i.e. at a moment of your choosing) 
the large metal slab will slide away with a loud scrap-
ing noise. A deep rumble rises from the underground 
silo that is revealed, and a plume of steam a

--- PAGE 215

15
2 1 3
Special Zone Sectors
born, but none of them have been luminescent so 
far. The fanatical Plutonia has forced the mothers 
to leave the infants to die in the Zone. Now, the 
young priestess Abbetina (below) is pregnant, and 
has decided that she will never let Plutonia take her 
child from her.
Plutonia believes that Abbetina bears the lumi-
nescent child and that the Doomsday will come soon. 
She has managed to start up the missile launch sys-
tem, and is now considering an appropriate target for 
this weapon of mass destruction. In the meantime, 
several cult members are starting to question Pluto-
nia’s leadership. She has responded by handing out 
“holy pills” (sedatives), to make the cult members 
more docile. But this state of affairs cannot last…
INHABITANTS
The first creatures the PCs meet in this Zone sector 
are probably Ohm and his surly mutant hogs, that 
he keeps for the cult. The Nova Cult itself has 20 
members. Mostly, they stay down in their under-
ground “temple” where they meditate and study 
artifacts from the Old Age. Sometimes, they go on 
patrols in the Zone, to leave infants to die (above 
and page 173) or to search for artifacts.
All Nova Cult members have shaved heads and 
wear long robes. Some adorn themselves with glit-
tering items they have found in the Zone. A few 
wield simple scrap weapons like spears and knives, 
but most are unarmed. All cult members are power-
ful psionic mutants. For stats, see page 174.
Ohm, Pig Farmer. A large, reptilian hunchbacked 
mutant with a cloven tongue. He moves jerkily, 
speaks with a lisp and is dressed in blue coveralls. 
He has followed Plutonia from the start, but he is 
not accepted as a full member of the cult as he does 
not have any psionic mutations. He is sick of being 
treated like a second-rate mutant, and might take 
the chance to get back at the cultists, given the 
chance. Deep inside, he still loves Plutonia however. 
And his hogs.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 3, Wits 3, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Fight 3, Move 2.
Mutations:  Reptilian, 3 MP .
g ea
r:  Scrap knife, gas mask (artifact).
Plutonia , Cult Leader. Tall and anemic woman with a 
shaved head. Walks with regal stride

--- PAGE 216

15
O HM ’ S  P IG S TY
C UL
T  H EA
D q UA
RTERS
2 1 4
GAmemaster's Section
The Nova Cult
scattered throughout the bunker. Let the players 
draw random Artifact Cards, or choose something 
appropriate from Chapter 14. It might even be one 
of the artifacts leading the way to Eden (Chapter 16).
The missile in the silo is of course also an arti-
fact. However, it is set up within the silo and next 
to impossible to remove. It is launched by a launch 
key (carried by Plutonia at all times) and a simple 
six-digit code (which only Plutonia knows). The de-
structive power of the missile warhead is horren-
dous. In the sector where it strikes, and in all eight 
surrounding sectors, all buildings are leveled and 
all life wiped out. Anyone within ten sectors of the 
detonation suffer a Rot attack – the number of Rot 
Points immediately suffered is equal to 10 minus 
the distance to the detonation sector. This entire 
area is then contaminated and all sectors within it 
suffer from Rot Level 2 (Chapter 8).
GRUB & WATER
In locked cabinets, there is grub enough to feed 
the cult for a week. There is meat from the pigs, 
some grub grown by Ohm, and some canned food 
from the Old Age. Only Plutonia has the key to 
the cabinets. Clean water, enough to last a week, is 
stored in plastic jerrycans and bottles scattered in 
the underground complex.
EVENTS
Present the Nova cultists as aloof and mysterious. 
They can show up in many places and be enemies 
as well as allies to the People. See the Threat Card 
The Zone Cult (Chapter 10) and the Zone threat 
Nova Cultists (Chapter 13) for examples of how the 
PCs can come into contact with the cult. They can 
also hear about the cult from NPCs that they meet 
when traveling in the Zone. When the PCs have 
found their way to the cult’s headquarters, many 
things might happen:
 K A PC with the Luminescence mutation would 
be seen as a holy creature by the cultists. 
They all kneel in reverence, handing the PC 
scrap and artifacts as gifts. It is up to the PCs 
how they wish to handle the situation. Pluto-
nia will feel threatened by the newcomers and 
might resort to drastic action.



--- PAGE 217

15
M ISSILE  S ILO
2 1 5
Special Zone Sectors




--- PAGE 218

15
2 1 6
GAmemaster's Section
 K If the PCs come into conflict with Nova, Plu-
tonia wants them captured and questioned 
to find out if they have seen any unmutated 
humans anywhere. After the interrogation – 
whatever answers the PCs give – they will be 
chained in the missile silo to be incinerated 
when the missile is launched.
 K Abbetina turns to the PCs for help to get rid 
of Plutonia – and kill her if necessary. Abbet-
ina may free the PCs if they have been cap-
tured. She may even take this initiative if she 
meets the PCs somewhere else, for example 
in the Ark. In this case she might offer some 
reward in the return for their help, such as a 
clue to the location of Eden.
 K Plutonia suddenly decrees that the Dooms-
day will take place in just a few days. The 
cult assembles in the temple and chants 
incessantly. The PCs show up at the bunker, 
or are already there. Do they try to stop her? 
If pressed, Plutonia may very well launch the 
missile even if Abbetina hasn’t given birth 
yet. You decide what target Plutonia chooses, 
if the missile lands somewhere in the Zone or 
far away – perhaps hitting someone who will 
retaliate?



--- PAGE 219

15
2 1 7
Special Zone Sectors
THE HELLDRIVERS
The Helldrivers are a gasoline-guzzling mutant clan 
that the PCs can meet by the Ark (see the Threat 
Card described in Chapter 10) or out in the Zone 
(page 173). This Special Zone Sector describes the 
Helldrivers’ main base of operations.
OVERVIEW
Even at a distance, the silhouette of a large, cubi-
cal building can be seen against the horizon. The 
building consists of eight open floors, with rows of 
vehicles and wrecks seen on every floor.
In the rubble around the main building, there 
are a number of sheds, motorhomes, tents and ve-
hicle wrecks turned into living quarters. There is 
also a large metal cage with crude spectator stands 
on either side. Several dozens of people – most with 
colorful mohawk haircuts and black leather out-
fits – mill about the area. Some are busy tinkering 
with their vehicles, some lift weights and others 
sit by a fire, eating. The rumble of engines is heard 
constantly.
The entire compound is encircled by a barbed-
wire fence. At some points on the fence, red STOP-
signs are mounted. Here and there, decomposing 
remains of humanoids and animals lie on the 
ground. The stench of death is pungent.
THE SITUATION
This settlement is the home of the Helldrivers, and 
band of rough and tumble mutants who have been 
exiled from their Arks (or left voluntarily). They 
are led by Ilona the Corpse-Eater who first found 
this old car park, packed with working vehicles. 
Using these, the Helldrivers have raided other 
settlements in the Zone, increasing their number 
and improving their weaponry over the years. The 
basement levels of the car park are filled with loot 
from these raids. The Helldrivers have also taken 
slaves, who now toil as chain-gang servants to the 
Helldrivers.
Ilona the Corpse-Eater is a large mutant who 
has killed every rival who has tried to challenge her 
leadership. She rules her horde with an iron fist – 
the only way to control such an unruly bunch. Most 
Helldrivers are violent and impulsive types, driven 
by hatred and bitterness. Violent internal rivalry is 
common. Lately, the supply of food and slaves has 
been running low, and the Helldrivers are getti

--- PAGE 220

15
ILONA’S ARMOR-PLATED TRAILER
HELLDRIVER CARS
GUARD ON THE ROOF
2 1 8
GAmemaster's Section
The Helldrivers



--- PAGE 221

15
WORKSHOP
ARENA FOR CAGE FIGHTS
2 1 9
Special Zone Sectors
Gaffa, Roadwarrior in Love. A tall, wiry Helldriver 
dressed in black leather and long, stark red hair. She 
has lots of scrap piercings in her face. She is Ilona’s 
bodyguard and follows her everywhere. She sought 
this position for one reason only – she loves Ilona 
more than her own life. Gaffa is obsessed, jealous 
and bloodthirsty.
a ttributes:  Strength 2, Agility 4, Wits 3, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Fight 3, Move 4, Shoot 4, Jury-Rig 2.
Mutations:  Sprinter, 3 MP .
g ea
r:  Motorcycle, hockey helmet (artifact), scrap pistol, 
scrap knife.
Raff,  Forgotten Thief. A short and skinny charac-
ter who prefers to stay in the background. He uses 
nuts and bolts as ear piercings and wears his hair 
in a purple mane, but is not much of a Helldriver. 
He lives in constant fear of being beaten by other 
Helldrivers, and always agrees with whatever others 
tell him. Raff is a kleptomaniac and fills his pockets 
with whatever he can find. He has no real loyalty to 
Ilona, and only looks after his own interests.
a ttributes:  Strength 2, Agility 4, Wits 2, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Fight 1, Move 4, Jury-Rig 1.
Mutations:  Human Magnet, 3 MP .
g ea
r:  Wrench (artifact).
ARTIFACTS
A number of artifacts can be found in the base of 
the Helldrivers – if the PCs can get close enough 
to get their hands on them.
 K 10–20 armored and operational buggys and 
cars (page 199).
 K 200 car wrecks (of which 5–10 might be pos-
sible to repair).
 K 5–10 operational motorcycles.
 K 30 motorcycle wrecks (of which 2–3 can be 
repaired).
 K 10 motorhomes and trailers (not operational).
GEAR, GRUB AND WATER
Scattered around the sheds and trailers, there is lots 
of scrap that the Helldrivers have found on their 
raids. Most of it is useless.



--- PAGE 222

15
2 2 0
GAmemaster's Section
Behind the garage, there is an operational well 
with clean water. On the top floor of the car park, 
there is a stockpile of grub – enough to feed all of 
the Helldrivers for a few days.
EVENTS
The Helldrivers can become dangerous enemies of 
the People, perhaps one of the greatest threats out 
there. However, manipulative PCs might strike up 
an alliance with Ilona and her band of road war-
riors. Here are three possible events that can lead 
to major campaign events:
 K Seven mutants from the Ark have been 
taken prisoner by the Helldrivers. One or 
more of them should be an NPC that a PC 
has a relationship to. One might be a Boss. 
The PCs are sent – or go on their own ini-
tiative – to scout the Helldrivers’ base and 
plan a rescue operation. It turns out that 
some of the captives are being held in the 
car park basement. One or two have been 
sold as slaves to some other faction in the 
Zone.
 K The Helldrivers have had a huge drinking 
binge. Most of the road warriors are sleep-
ing it off in and around the car park. The 
PCs can fairly easily enter the compound, 
steal some gear and free at least some of 
the slaves. Sooner or later, some Helldrivers 
will wake up and spot the intruders.
 K Two rival factions of Helldrivers duke it out 
inside the compound. They drive around 
the car park with their vehicles, trying to 
ram each other. The fight escalates quickly 
and soon a fuel tank explodes. The fire 
spreads rapidly. A large pillar of smoke 
rises and can be seen for miles. About 20 
Helldrivers die in the battle and the fire. 
The smoke attracts some other faction in 
the Zone, who seizes the opportunity and 
attacks the compound without mercy. The 
PCs can get involved at any stage. They 
can join the attackers, help the Helldrivers, 
or just use the chaos and confusion to their 
own ends.
RUST CASTLE
This Special Zone Sector is a trading post, a sanctu-
ary where travelers from all corners of the Zone can 
meet. It is also a place of intrigue – the calm in Rust 
Castle is a thin veneer. We suggest that you don’t 
let the PCs visit Rust Castle until they have had a 
chance to explore the Zone to some extent and have

--- PAGE 223

15
2 2 1
Special Zone Sectors
supply of pipes, metal plates, bolts, nuts, cables and 
anything else a Gearhead might need. The Mechies 
live on the top two decks of the ship, where they 
also have a kitchen and some common rooms. The 
lower decks of the wreck are a dark and tangled 
maze of passageways and steep ladders. At strategic 
locations, the Mechies have built hidden traps. The 
lightweight Mechies won’t trigger them, but a fully 
grown mutant might suddenly fall into a pit fitted 
with sharp spears – or suffer some other deadly fate. 
Spotting a trap requires a Scout roll, which is only 
allowed if the PC actively looks for it. Anyone who 
triggers a trap must make a Move roll (−2) to avoid 
being injured. If the Move roll fails, roll for an at-
tack using 4–8 Base Dice (weapon damage 1). The 
attack cannot be parried.
The Marketplace: The aft ramp of the ship fell off  
long ago, and the lower car deck is partly filled with 
water. It has turned into a small harbor, safe from 
the wind and the rain. By the gate, the Mechies have 
fitted a big portcullis built out of scrap. It can be 
hand-winched up and down, to close and open the 
gate as the Mechies see fit. Inside, on the upper car 
deck, there is a marketplace where mutants gather 
from all over the Zone to barter and exchange in-
formation with the Mechies and each other. Very 
few visitors are ever allowed to go further into the 
ship – most are only allowed on the car deck.
The marketplace of Rust Castle has come to 
be used as neutral ground where even sworn en-
emies leave their weapons at the door. Here, the 
PCs can, for example, meet representatives from 
the main factions of the Zone – like the Nova Cult 
or the Helldrivers. Anyone is allowed to barter in 
Rust Castle, after they have been approved by the 
Mechies’ leader Nikkil and have paid a fee – a few 
bullets. Nikkil keeps an eye on the market to make 
sure the trade is free and fair.
Nikkil and the other Mechies are protected by 
the “Whoppers” – four colossal mutant guards. They 
make every visitor turn over their weapons before 
entering the semi-darkness inside Rust Castle. The 
Whoppers will use force against anyone who causes 

--- PAGE 224

15
THE MECHIES’ q UA RTERS
UNDERWATER SUPPORT BEAMS
2 2 2
GAmemaster's Section
Rust Castle



--- PAGE 225

15
SPEAR TRAPS
MARKETPLACE
2 2 3
Special Zone Sectors




--- PAGE 226

15
2 2 4
GAmemaster's Section
a ttributes:  Strength 1, Agility 5, Wits 5, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Move 4, Shoot 4, Know the Zone 3, Heal 3, Find the 
Path 3.
Mutations:  Extreme Reflexes, 3 MP .
g ea
r:  Twin-barrelled scrap rifle, seven bullets. The steamboat 
Steelcrest (below).
Ylora  is the Mechies’ Chronicler and teacher. She is 
bony, blond and has a pug nose. Ylora sees knowl-
edge of the world as an end in itself. She can often 
be found in the Mechies library and schoolroom on 
the top deck of Rust Castle, where she studies books 
from the Old Age and teaches what she knows to 
the other Mechies. Ylora travels the Zone with El-
with, to document it and map it out. They are sisters 
and stick together. Ylora is very verbacious and 
never hesitates to speak her mind about anything.
a ttributes:  Strength 1, Agility 4, Wits 5, Empathy 4.
Skills:  Move 3, Comprehend 3, Heal 4, Inspire 4. 
Mutations:  Insect Wings, 1 MP .
g ea
r:  Books, paper and pens.
The Whoppers  are the Mechies’ bodyguards, all 
Enforcers. They are two sisters and two brothers: 
Elli, Roggi, Tir and Cad. They are all over seven 
feet tall and weigh as much as two regular-sized 
mutants. The Whoppers don’t originally belong to 
the Mechie clan – they were wandering mutants 
who were hired as guards by Nikkil a few years ago, 
and have stayed on. All except Roggi like it here 
– in Rust Castle, they get company, grub, shelter 
and booze.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 4, Wits 2, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Fight 4, Shoot 2.
Mutations:  Four-Armed (Elli), Corpse-Eater (Roggi), Acid 
Spit (Tir), Sonar (Cad), 3 MP .
g ea
r:  Each Whopper has a scrap pistol with three bullets.
STEELCREST AND SCRAPFLASH
The steamboat Steelcrest was built five years ago 
by the Mechie Konior, who was a very skilled Gear-
head. He was killed by a Rotfish, and no one is likely 
to build something like Steelcrest again. She is the 
most prized possession of the Mechies, used to 
travel the waters of the Zone.
The boat is about 30 feet long and can carry 
ten passengers. It cuts the time it takes to explore 
a coastal Zone sector in half. It can also be used 
to escape from threats or to ram enemies at sea. 
How vehicles 

--- PAGE 227

15
2 2 5
Special Zone Sectors
 K Suddenly, a deafening thunder shakes Rust 
Castle, and the entire wreck tilts. Visitors to 
the marketplace flee in their boats, fearing 
the old ferry will sink. If the PCs stay and 
if they are on friendly terms with Nikkil, he 
admits that Rust Castle is crumbling from the 
bottom up. It is only a matter of time before 
the wreck collapses entirely. To make matters 
worse, it seems like someone has deliberately 
sabotaged the hull.
 K Nikkil asks the PCs for help. He wants to 
send Elwith and Steelcrest to search for metal 
beams that can support the wreck, but he 
needs extra manpower – preferably Enforcers 
and Gearheads, but anyone willing to help is 
welcome. Ylora and the Whopper Roggi also 
join the expedition. During the journey, Roggi 
will try to sabotage Steelcrest and – if he can – 
get the PCs killed.
 K The enemy faction conspiring against the 
Mechies (above) attack Rust Castle in full 
force. They try to blow holes in the old wreck 
using explosive charges, in order to gain 
entry and steal the treasures that they believe 
are hidden inside. If they don’t succeed, the 
attack could turn into a siege. The PCs can 
choose to join the attackers or to help the 
Mechies in the defense.



--- PAGE 228

15
2 2 6
GAmemaster's Section
PLAYER MAP 1 : THE PUR E PLA NT



--- PAGE 229

15
2 2 7
Special Zone Sectors
P LAYER  MAP  2 : T HE  O TH ER  A RK



--- PAGE 230

15
2 2 8
GAmemaster's Section
PLAYER MAP 3 : THE HEL LDRIVERS



--- PAGE 231

15
2 2 9
Special Zone Sectors
P LAYER  M AP  4 : R US T  C AS TLE



--- PAGE 232





--- PAGE 233

16
2 3 1
THE PATH TO EDEN
16
THE PATH TO EDEN
Where do the People come from? What is the origin 
of their supernatural powers? Who is the Elder? 
Where is Eden – and what happens if the People 
find it? These existential questions might not be 
something the PCs ponder every day in the harsh 
post-apocalyptic world – but sooner or later they 
will wonder. Search for answers. And these answers 
are there for them to discover. But first – some back-
ground. Do not read this if you are a player in Mu-
tant: Year Zero. This text is for the GM’s eyes only.
JEREMIAH ATWOOD
During the final years of the Old Age, before the 
final Fall, the scientists of the world searched for an-
swers to the mounting threats against human civili-
zation – war, disease, pollution, financial meltdown, 
social unrest. One of the most brilliant – but also 
the most controversial – of these scientists was Pro-
fessor Jeremiah Atwood, an acclaimed geneticist. 
In his view, suffering, misery and destruction were 
hardwired into the very nature of the human race. 
He questioned whether the survival of humanity 
was actually desirable. Unsurprisingly, he was heav-
ily criticized, and withdrew from the world to devote 
himself entirely to his radical science projects.
PROJECT EDEN
Professor Atwood’s vision was to create a new, 
mutated human race, free from selfishness and 
aggression, to replace its human ancestors. The 
work was to be his crowning achievement, and with 
considerable resources at his disposal he was able 
to delve deeper into human DNA than anyone had 
done before. At its very core, he found an untapped 
potential for change and adaptation, the very build-
ing blocks of a new and improved being. He called 
his vision Project Eden, as his goal was to create a 
new and unspoilt society on Earth.
THE RED PLAGUE
As if from nowhere, a virus spread across the glo-
balized world, bringing death and destruction on a 
scale that humanity had never seen before. The con-
tagion came to be known as the Red Plague, named 
after the first symptom of the disease: bloodshot 
eyes, that soon started to bleed profusely. At that 
point, a painful death was only a day away. Profes-
sor Atwood di

--- PAGE 234

16
2 3 2
GAmemaster’s Section
open violence. Under the threat of total annihila-
tion posed by the Red Plague, no one hesitated to 
use the ultimate weapon. Global nuclear war broke 
out, and one after another mushroom clouds rose 
over the world’s major cities. Human civilization 
was on its deathbed.
THE GREAT ESCAPE
The end of the world came fast, but humanity did 
have time to try to save itself, like rats off a sinking 
ship. The rich and powerful escaped the devastated 
surface of the Earth and sought refuge underground, 
at the bottom of the ocean – and out in the solar sys-
tem. Huge shelters and space stations, the size of 
small cities, were built. These were called enclaves. 
The enclaves were big, but only had room for a frac-
tion of the world’s population – the ones chosen for 
their intelligence or skills, or simply the ones rich 
enough to buy their way in. The rest of humanity 
was left on Earth’s surface. Almost everyone was 
lost. Just a few poor souls survived the horrors of 
the Apocalypse, against all odds.
THE TITAN POWERS
The purpose of the enclaves was to preserve a small 
remnant of human civilization. The enclaves were 
built to be self-sufficient and peaceful, ruled by the 
best scientists, philosophers and politicians that 
humanity could muster. But the settlers brought 
old grudges into the enclaves, and in the deep iso-
lation and hopelessness they grew into suspicion 
and hostility. The enclaves started to spy on each 
other, accused each other of stealing resources from 
the dying Earth and seeking dominion over others. 



--- PAGE 235

16
2 3 3
THE PATH TO EDEN
Pacts were made and soon broken. Over time, a 
handful of more established alliances among the 
enclaves were formed, and became known as Titan 
Powers. These were enclaves with a similar history 
or ideology, or just a common enemy to overcome. 
Research in the enclaves was increasingly turned 
toward military purposes. Weapon systems and 
robotic creatures, more advanced than a previous 
generation could ever imagine, were created in the 
darkness.
THE ENCLAVE WAR
Who first pressed the button is lost in the oblivion 
of history. When the cold war between the Ti-
tan Powers turned into a hot war, no enclave was 
left untouched. Weapons of ultimate destructive 
power that had been developed during the dec-
ades that had passed since the Fall, were power-
ful enough to cripple an enemy enclave with a 
single strike.
More than half of the existing enclaves were de-
stroyed in the first few weeks of the war. Most of the 
surviving enclaves were badly damaged and many 
lost communication with the outside world. The 
Enclave War entered a low-intensity phase, where 
dying enclaves often did not know if their enemies 
and allies were still out there or not. But the fear and 
distrust ran deep, and no one ever called a cease-
fire. The Enclave War is still going on, far above 
and below the mutants of the Ark.
PROJECT EDEN, PART 2
One enclave – a colossal structure orbiting the 
devastated Earth in low orbit like a metal moon 
– survived the Enclave War relatively intact. It be-
longed to the Titan Power called Mimir. While other 
refugees from the dead planet fled further out into 
the solar system, a group of scientists in this orbital 
enclave harbored a burning desire to return to their 
ancestral home.
These Mimer scientists worshipped Jeremiah 
Atwood like a betrayed messiah, and dreamt of com-
pleting his plans. The field of genetic engineering 
had evolved rapidly and was being used to adapt 
humanity to a life in space. Could not the same 
technology be used to adapt humanity to the rav-
aged environment on the Earth’s surface?
Project Eden was brought back to life, on a small 
scale and hidden from the rulers of the enclave, who 
ha

--- PAGE 236

16
2 3 4
GAmemaster’s Section
refused to carry out her orders, and chaos ensued. 
In the end, these scientists fled with the children 
into the Zone, to the Arks. The doors to Eden closed 
behind them forever.
In the Arks, many of the scientists soon suc-
cumbed to the Rot or were killed by grotesque 
mutated monsters. They had no way to contact 
Mimer. Some could not bear the isolation, misery 
and filth, and took their own lives. Project Eden 
was lost. But the young mutants lived on, unaware 
of their origin.
THE METAPLOT IN GAME
The People’s settlement is of course one of the 
Arks of Project Eden. And the Elder is a sur-
viving scientist. This means the PCs are 
actually not survivors of the Apoca-
lypse, but rather research experi-
ments planted on Earth’s surface 
much later.
These fundamental truths 
can be revealed by the players 
during the course of the game. 
To do so, they must find the 
old Eden command center – 
that is, the Eden of the Peo-
ple’s myths. If the PCs get 
there and survive the threats 
in the deeps, they will also get 
an opportunity to leave Earth 
on a one-way ticket and join hu-
manity’s new civilization in the so-
lar system. What happens there 
is beyond the scope of this core 
rulebook and will be explored in 
a future expansion.
THE ELDER
The Elder is one of the researchers 
of Project Eden. He knows the truth 
about the People, but despite the col-
lapse of Project Eden he has followed 
the order to keep quiet during all these 
years. To reveal the truth to the test 
subjects would affect their behav-
ior and disrupt the experiment, and 
was therefore strictly forbidden. The Elder, or doc-
tor Sebedius as his real name is, hoped that a res-
cue mission would come to his aid. It never did. As 
the years went by, the Elder became less and less 
interested in his old life. And lately, he has become 
weak and frail, harrowed by age, Rot and the hard 
life in the Ark.
As GM, you can use the Elder to give the PCs 
clues about Eden and other things, but as he is so 
diminished both physically and mentally that they 
won’t be able to force any information out of him 
that you don’t want them to have. If they interrogate 
him, he ca

--- PAGE 237

16
2 3 5
THE PATH TO EDEN
than giving them the artifact itself right away. Con-
sider each of the three artifacts as plot devices that 
you can use in whichever fashion you prefer.
The three artifacts are the Cassette Player, the 
Video Camera, and the ID Card. A fourth artifact, 
the Diary, will tell the players a little about the back-
story, but will not help them locate Eden.
THE CASSETTE PLAYER
This device has a radio receiver, and if they manage 
to turn it on the PC will hear an ancient emergency 
transmission that has been repeated for decades, 
since the days of the Apocalypse. A stern voice 
calls on everyone with “security clearance level 5 or 
higher” to go to the nearest “command center”. The 
voice then lists five such command centers, named 
Alpha, Bravo, Charlie, Delta and Echo, and lists the 
coordinates where each of them is located. All other 
citizens are told to stay in their homes.
A PC who hears the transmission and makes a 
Comprehend roll will be able to figure out which 
sectors of the Zone the five command centers are lo-
cated in. Simply choose any five sectors on the map 
that you like. Have them scattered all over the Zone. 
Command Center Delta is Eden, but the PCs have 
no way of knowing that without the Video Camera.
THE VIDEO CAMERA
This artifact holds a short video clip that shows 
how the Eden scientists leave the bunker. Wear-
ing heavy protective gear, they walk out through a 
big metal door in the rockside. The scientists are 
followed by thousands of children, no more than 
three or four years old. Some of the children have 
obvious mutations. On the partly opened gate a 
flaking text says “Eden”, and below that, “Command 
Center Delta”. Using this artifact, the PCs can both 
learn about their origin and understand that Eden 



--- PAGE 238

16
2 3 6
GAmemaster’s Section
and Command Center Delta are the same place. 
They can also see what the terrain looks like in the 
immediate vicinity of the gate to Eden.
On the previous page, there is a picture that 
shows a scene from the video clip. Show it to the 
players when they watch the film stored in the Video 
Camera.
THE ID CARD
Using this scratched and dirty ID card the PCs can 
open the gate to Eden. The text on the card says 
“Eden Security” which should make the players un-
derstand its significance. Without this card, the PCs 
will have no way to open the gate.
THE DIARY
This worn and waterlogged notebook used to be-
long to one of the Eden scientists – not the Elder, 
but one of his colleagues who left Eden at the same 
time. A good place for the PCs to find the diary is 
the old purification plant (page 201). If they find 
the book and make a Comprehend roll, show them 
Handout #1 (also available for download from the 
Modiphius website). Note the Mimir logo on the 
page – it will mean nothing to the PCs when they 
first see it, but it will return inside Eden.
COMMAND CENTER DELTA – EDEN
Mythical Eden is a very important location in Mu-
tant: Year Zero. Finding the old bunker and explor-
ing it may very well be the culmination of a long 
campaign – even though you certainly can play on 
after Eden has been found.
HISTORY
The underground facility that the People call Eden 
has a long history and has been thrown between 
desperate hope to deep despair – twice. The bunker 
complex was first built before the Fall as a shelter 
for the people of the Old Age. It had been closed 
and almost forgotten when the Red Plague came 
and the wars broke out.
Panicked people filled every shelter they could 
find. In the biggest shelters, command centers were 
established. From here, the leaders of the nation 
could continue to rule from a safe location. In the 
shelter with the code name Command Center Delta, 
more than six thousand souls had sought refuge 
when the gates were sealed. Most of them were lead-
ing politicians and civil servants, others just rich or 
lucky enough to squeeze in.
The relief of having found protection did not 
last long. Days turned

--- PAGE 239

16
November 14
I left the Ark like a thief in the night. I had no other 
choice. They would never understand why I had to leave 
them. They must fend for themselves now. I have to get 
back to Eden.
November 17
I have walked through the Zone for three days. I think 
Zone-Ghouls, or something worse, are stalking me. Am 
I on the right path? I can’t remember the way. I have to 
find a lookout point somewhere.
November 18
Was I right to leave my post? There was still so much 
to learn, to discover. And I miss my children more than 
anything.
November 19
The damned Zone-Ghouls attacked me just before 
dawn. Only my insomnia saved my life. All food and 
water is gone. The keycard to Eden as well. The 
bastards might as well have killed me. There is no hope.
HANDOUT #1: THE DIARY
2 3 7
THE PATH TO EDEN




--- PAGE 240

16
SENTRY
G AR
AGE
D OR
MITORIES
CO
NTROL ROOM
C RE
MATORIUM
GE
NETICS LAB
CRYO CHAMBER
R EA
CTOR
ST
ORAGE
CELL BLOCK
ROAD TUNNEL
SERVICE AREA
Project Eden
2 3 8
GAmemaster’s Section




--- PAGE 241

16
KITCHEN/CANTEEN
COMMAND BRIDGE
INFIRMARY
N UR
SERY
LI
VING q UA
RTERS
2 3 9
THE PATH TO EDEN
protocol – to stay put and wait for the rescue and 
ration the food. The resulting hunger fueled the 
discontent, and finally the inevitable revolt broke 
out. The leaders’ security guards, fearing for their 
lives, resorted to violence. It turned into a blood-
bath. The few survivors decided to leave the shelter 
and venture out, in search of food. They never re-
turned. Command Center Delta, one of humanity’s 
last flickering lights of civilization, went out.
Decades passed. Command Center Delta be-
came a forgotten crypt in a ruined world – until 
the Project Eden scientists searched ancient data 
files for a good place on the Earth’s surface to base 
their grand experiment in. They chose Command 
Center Delta, which the scientists renamed Eden. 
With their hyper-advanced technology, they quickly 
restored the old shelter and added a genetics lab 
and rocket launch silo to it. Yet again, this facility 
would turn out to be a curse rather than the sal-
vation of humanity. When Project Eden collapsed, 
most of the scientists fled into the Zone. Only the 
leader and founder of the project – Doctor Retzius 
– and a few of her most loyal assistants, remained.
THE CURRENT SITUATION
When the PCs finally find Eden they might expect 
the old bunker to be empty and deserted. This is not 
the case. Doctor Retzius has lived in the deeps dur-
ing the last two decades. Her assistants are forced 
to spend most of their time in cryosleep, in order 
to ensure the survival of Project Eden. With des-
peration descending into madness she has tried to 
create the perfect mutant race as professor Atwood 
envisioned it, a resilient being who can withstand 
the rigors of the Zone – and exterminate the “defec-
tive” mutants from Project Eden’s first generation. 
She thinks she has succeeded. The PCs might take a 
different view when they meet the Omega Mutants, 
as Retzius calls them.
When the PCs knock on Eden’s door, Retzius is 
in the final stages of preparation for releasing the 
Omega Mutants into the Zone. She is not prepared 
for the intrusion and reacts with fear and anger. 
When 

--- PAGE 242

16
2 4 0
GAmemaster’s Section
As the PCs explore Eden they may find clues 
about the history of the bunker as well as their own 
origin. Sooner or later they will run into the Omega 
Mutants, and finally Doctor Retzius herself. It may 
turn into a violent confrontation – but the PCs can 
get unexpected help. Firstly, there is one “Alpha 
Mutant” – as Retzius calls the first generation – who 
has lived hidden in the darkness of the bunker for 
all these years, and now sees an opportunity to fight 
Retzius. Secondly, the doctor is over-confident re-
garding the loyalty of the Omega Mutants – some 
of them have doubts about their “mother” and can 
change sides at a critical stage.
THE GATE
The entrance to Eden is a massive steel door in the 
cliff face, big enough for a truck to drive through. 
Despite its size, the gate is not easy to spot from a 
distance, as it’s partly overgrown by weeds. Next to 
the gate, there is a sign with the worn and almost 
illegible text “Command Center Delta” on it. Above 
that, there is somewhat clearer but still damaged 
text that says “Eden”.
The Gate:  Below the sign, there is a small electronic 
card reader and a camera. Both seem out of order, 
but if the ID Card (page 236) is held up against the 
card reader, a small green diode will light up. Then, 
the three feet thick solid metal door will slowly start 
to rumble and slide aside, revealing a tunnel lead-
ing into the darkness…
Checkpoint:  Just inside the gate, on the right-hand 
side, there is a small sentry box. It’s empty, apart 
from some random scrap. There is a terminal and 
a screen, but neither seem to work.
The Tunnel:  A road tunnel slopes down, deep into 
the ground. The air is cold and smells of damp rock. 
It is pitch black (page 93), so without a torch, a flash-
light or a Luminescent mutant, the PCs will have 
to feel their way down. Along the sides there are 
several car wrecks that have rusted away completely.
The Garage:  After about 200 yards, the tunnel ends 
in a large subterranean garage. There are more car 
wrecks here, some of which are possible to Jury-Rig 
into working order. On the far wall, there is a large 
metal double blast door. There is card

--- PAGE 243

16
HANDOUT #2: FL OOR  PL AN  OF  C OM MAND  C EN TER  D EL TA
2 4 1
THE PATH TO EDEN




--- PAGE 244

16
2 4 2
GAmemaster’s Section
roll will realize the dead have been here for many 
decades, as they are now little more than skeletons. 
A handful of corpses seem to have been soldiers in 
some kind of uniform, now decayed. Few weapons 
are to be found, but if the PCs search thoroughly 
you may allow them to find a semi-automatic pistol, 
a kevlar vest or even an assault rifle.
Main Corridor:  A main corridor runs all around the 
Upper Circle. On both sides of the corridor, there 
are doors leading to other rooms. At irregular in-
tervals, the main corridor is blocked by thick metal 
doors. Some are open but others are closed, the 
latter can easily be opened manually by turning 
the operating wheel. On the concrete walls warn-
ing signs, arrows and numbers are printed in yel-
low paint, now flaking and worn. Water pipes and 
electricity cables run along the ceiling of the main 
corridor.
Dormitories: Command Center Delta was built to 
accommodate 5,000 poor souls, and each and every 
one of them was provided with a bunk bed. In these 
deserted halls, there are thousands of narrow metal 
beds. Now, there is little or nothing of value here. 
The PC might find some scrap or a minor artifact.
Canteen: A large room filled with long tables and 
benches. Next to the canteen there is a simple 
kitchen. There is plenty of old kitchen gear, but not 
a single ration of grub.
Infirmary:  A number rooms of with narrow hospital 
beds and medical equipment. The rooms are filled 



--- PAGE 245

16
HANDOUT #3: THE L OG  B OO K
2 4 3
THE PATH TO EDEN
September 23
Still no contact with Command Center Alpha. It has been 
weeks now. Has it been attacked? Are they willfully ignoring 
us? Have they allied with our enemies?
October 17
All contact with other Command Centers has ceased. Why is 
no one coming to our aid? Are we the only ones left alive? 
We have been forced to cut the food rations in half. The 
civilians starve.
November 01
Renewed contact! Our technical staff today received a 
transmission from a facility with which we have not had 
contact before. They call themselves Elysium - the land of 
eternal spring. They say they are part of a new alliance of 
shelters, the beginning of a new nation. They say they are 
coming to our rescue. For the first time in months I feel 
hope.
November 06
Again, silence. Elysium is no longer responding to our 
signals. What has happened? Have they abandoned us too? Has 
something happened to them? Or was this just some kind of 
cruel hoax?
November 19
Today civilians protested outside the Command Bridge. 
Demanded food. I wanted to go out there and speak to them. 
Major Hendricks stopped me. Too dangerous, he said.
November 23
The civilians are in uproar. I watch them on our monitors. 
They chant, smashing furniture. They must understand 
that Major Hendricks and his men had no choice. Some 
civilians attacked them, tried to take their weapons. That 
kind of behavior is unacceptable. It is unfortunate that 
blood was spilt. Major Hendricks has my full support in 
quenching this rebellion. My responsibility is not only to 
help the civilians. It goes far beyond that - to safeguard 
what is left of our nation. Our knowledge, our culture, 
our civilization. My responsibility is the greatest one 
imaginable. Why can’t they understand that?
December 04
It will soon be over now. This will be my last entry in this 
log. I hear them beating at the door. It won’t be long now. So 
many have died. Soon I will join them. But I won’t let those 
bastards get me. I have no regrets. I did my duty. History 
will be my judge. If mankind still has a future.



--- PAGE 246

16
2 4 4
GAmemaster’s Section
by decomposed corpses, little more than skeletons, 
lying on the beds and in piles on the floor. Most of 
the dead have obvious damage from bullets, cuts 
and blows. All medicine and everything else of 
value have been looted long ago.
Storage: Simple store rooms, also looted long ago.
Incinerator:  Here, the inhabitants of Command 
Center Delta would get rid of their refuse – and 
many of their dead. A PC who makes a Comprehend 
roll can get the incinerator to work again.
Command Bridge: At the farthest point from the 
entrance, the facility that used to be the seat of 
governance for Command Center Delta is located. 
The metal door that leads into this area has been 
battered down by force from the outside. Around 
the gate, there are many corpses, both civilians and 
soldiers. Inside the Command Bridge are screens, 
terminals, telephones, file cabinets and computers. 
Most of the equipment is vandalized and covered 
by a thick layer of dust. The dead lie everywhere, 
mummified by the dry air here.
A corpse dressed in a suit and tie sits by a desk, 
reclined on a chair. He has an obvious gunshot 
wound to his head, and a functional revolver lies on 
the floor next to him. On the desk, there is a print-
out of a computer log book. The log book describes 
the final days of Command Center Delta. If the PCs 
make a Comprehend roll, give them Handout #3. 
They can also take the suit and the revolver (both 
are artifacts).
The Way Down: Next to the smashed gate leading 
into the Command Bridge, there is another, smaller 
metal door. It is also battered, but has not been 
broken down. The door has a card reader and slides 
open if the PCs use their ID Card. Inside, a steep 
and narrow staircase leads deeper into the bedrock. 
A faint light can be seen below. After a descent 
of about a hundred feet, the PCs reach the Lower 
Circle: the very heart of Project Eden.
THE LOWER CIRCLE
The first thing the PCs notice when stepping 
into the lower circle is that it is warmer, drier and 
brighter here, in stark contrast to the Upper Cir-
cle. A pale blue light shines from light strips in 
the ceiling. Some parts of the Lower Circle have 
been de

--- PAGE 247

16
HANDOUT #4: THE CH IL DS ’ D RA WING
2 4 5
THE PATH TO EDEN
children caged at night, since a simple nightmare 
could have very serious consequences. Here and 
there, childrens’ drawing hang on the walls. One of 
them, depicting Doctor Retzius and Doctor Sebe-
dius (the Elder) is drawn by one of the PCs. Choose 
one PC who looks at the drawings and tell him that 
he suddenly is overcome by a strong sense of deja 
vu. Give the player Handout #4. The PC remembers 
nothing about the people in the drawing.
Scientists’ Quarters:  This section contains separate 
suites that were once used by the top management 
of Command Center Delta – and later, by the scien-
tists of Project Eden. They are sparsely furnished and 
rather worn. There are few personal belongings here 
apart from some clothes, but in one of the suites the 
PCs may find a yellowed photo. It is a team picture 
of the leading Eden researchers. Give the players 
Handout #5. They immediately recognize Doctor 
Sebedius as the Elder – but much younger.
Emergency Exit: From the Scientist’s Quarters, a 
narrow tunnel leads away from Eden. Where this 
exit leads to in the Zone is up to you. It may even 
be connected to a whole network of tunnels in the 
bowels of the Zone.
The Genetics Lab  is the heart of Project Eden. Here, 
the first mutants were grown using DNA that the 
researchers had brought with them from their en-
clave in orbit. Later, Doctor Retzius continued her 
work here and finally created the Omega Mutants.
To the PCs, this room looks like a horror show. 
Among test tubes, screens and terminals, there are 
big glass vats with dead mutant infants and fetuses. 
Some of them look like Alpha Mutants, others are 
grotesquely deformed blends of animal and human 
forms, still others have tentacles and other strange 
outgrowths. Doctor Retzius has saved certain speci-
men from failed experiments, to learn from them. 
This environment is very suitable for having the 



--- PAGE 248

16
HANDOUT #5: THE P HO TOGRAPH
2 4 6
GAmemaster’s Section
PCs be attacked by an Omega Mutant – or even 
meet Doctor Retzius herself.
All of the technology in this room would take 
years to Comprehend, if such comprehension is 
even possible. But they can find interesting infor-
mation here by just quickly browsing a terminal. 
A PC who does that and makes a Comprehend roll 
can read an electronic log from Project Eden. Give 
the players Handout #6.
In the Genetics Lab, there are terminals that 
control doors and traps throughout the Lower Cir-
cle (above). Artifacts may also be found here, for 
example Sedatives, Painkillers and – if you feel 
generous – a dose of REGEN.
Cryolab: A smaller room next to the Genetics Lab 
houses ten cryosleep pods with transparent lids. 
Humans lie in three of them, two women and one 
man, frozen solid but still alive. These are Doctor 
Retzius’s lab assistants, whom she wakes from cry-
osleep at regular intervals (below). The PCs can 
wake them too, but this requires a successful Com-
prehend roll. Failing the roll will kill the patient.
Control Room: The walls of this room are covered 
by video screens showing the Rocket Silo with the 
rocket and space capsule at the top of it. To start 
countdown and launch the rocket, a PC must first 
Comprehend the terminals. An automated count-
down from ten minutes then starts – if the PCs want 
to fly off with the rocket, they have this long to get 
into the capsule. The countdown cannot be stopped 
once is has started.
A metal door in the Control Room is marked 
Rocket Silo, and leads to a narrow corridor to the 
launch pad. Near the door, there are six small 
booths with glass doors. Each booth contains a 
silvery space suit with helmet in the shape of a 
glass bubble. In the Control Room, there are also 
normal terminals that control the doors and traps 
in the Lower Circle.
Cell Block: A section of the Lower Circle with 20 
very cramped isolation cells. The floor, the ceiling 
and the walls are all made of rusty metal. Each cell 
has a door with a small observation hatch. These 
cells were originally built to hold miscreants in 
Command Center Delta behind bars, but they have 
been r

--- PAGE 249

16
2 4 7
THE PATH TO EDEN
The doors to the cells have keypad locks. Only 
Retzius (and possibly Endel) knows the six-digit 
codes. A PC who makes a Comprehend roll can 
lock an open cell door, and then pick the code used 
to open the lock again. The cell doors cannot be 
opened from a normal terminal (above).
Crematorium:  An incinerator like the one in the 
Upper Circle, this one is however operational. Doc-
tor Retzius uses it to dispose of failed genetic exper-
iments. Anything living thrown into the incinerator 
is killed instantly.
Nuclear Reactor:  A narrow concrete corridor leads 
to the nuclear reactor that powers Eden. The reactor 
is leaking, and this section therefore has Rot Level 3 
(one Rot Point per minute). There is a small control 
room next to the reactor core.
TRAPS
The experiments of Project Eden have always been 
dangerous – the scientists knew that their geneti-
cally engineered beings could turn against them. To 
protect themselves, they installed defense mecha-
nisms in selected locations in the Lower Circle 
– hidden traps based on gas, electricity or micro-
waves. Where these traps are located is not set – as 
GM, place them where you like. The traps can be 
triggered from a terminal in the Genetics Lab or 
the Control Room.
Electric Trap:  A hidden circuit in the floor, ceil-
ing and walls creates a strong electric current. This 
works as an explosion with Blast Power 6, but it in-
flicts fatigue (trauma to Agility) instead of damage. 
Armor gives no protection, but mutations might. 
Anyone who suffers fatigue from the attack must 
make a Move roll to be able to move at all (this roll 
does not count as an action). Failure means that 
the victim is paralyzed and will be attacked again 
in the same manner in the next turn.
Gas Trap:  Metal doors close behind and in front of 
the victims, who must make a Move roll to avoid 
getting trapped between the doors. In the next turn, 
a gas is pumped into the enclosure and anyone 
trapped in it will be subject to an attack with six 
Base Dice – every / rolled inflicts one point of con-
fusion (trauma to Wits). The person who activated 
the trap chooses when the doors open and the gas 
disperses

--- PAGE 250

16
HANDOUT #6: THE EDEN LOG
2 4 8
GAmemaster’s Section
MARCH 5
Phase 1 is complete. Everything is going according to plan. 
Proposed sites for the Arks of Project Eden are all examined 
and approved. The growth of the test subjects are within 
expected parameters. They must be planted in the wild at a 
young age so that we can study the effects of the toxins and 
radiation on the mitosis in their bodies.
We are humanity’s heroes. Professor Atwood was our savior, 
not our executioner. When we finish his work, Mimir will 
understand. Everyone will understand. History will prove us 
right. ■
MAY 21
The test subjects exhibit unexpected and irregular behavior. 
Fits of insubordination and violence, combined with their 
hypergenetic abilities pose a direct security risk. I have 
instructed Doctor Sebedius to install defense mechanisms in 
the facility, using a fentanyl-based gas, high voltage and 
microwaves, to protect the science team. In all probability, 
it is just a temporary phase. ■
JUNE 07
The insubordination of the test subjects is escalating. 
Doctor Aylo passed away this morning, after yesterday’s 
attack from a test subject exhaling ignited gases at him. 
Three test subjects were terminated by Doctor Sebedius 
microwave traps. Adequate functionality. ■
JUNE 09
A total of 23 test subjects have now been terminated in 
total. Some individuals in the science team exhibit lapses 
of loyalty. Today, I revealed the genetic security mechanism 
that is wired into every test subject of Project Eden: even 



--- PAGE 251

16
2 4 9
THE PATH TO EDEN
when reaching a sexually mature age, they will be unable to 
reproduce with each other, in order to avoid an uncontrolled 
population growth. Doctor Sebedius’s emotional response can 
only described as unprofessional. ■
JUNE 17
My decision is made. The test subjects must be terminated. 
After last night’s riot, that cost nine science team members 
their lives, there is no other choice. The test subjects 
are much too unstable to be released into the external 
environment. The fault is mine. We must start over. Project 
Eden is too important to take any chances. ■
JUNE 18
The science team members protest against my decision. Their 
emotional bonds to the test subjects have grown too strong 
for them to react rationally. I will not change my mind. 
They cannot stop me. My personal research assistants will 
follow my orders. The terminations will commence tomorrow. ■
JUNE 19
Mutiny. During the night, the entire science team – Doctor 
Sebedius, Doctor Barnabas, Doctor Thaddeus, Doctor Lucas 
and Doctor Nathanael – have left Eden with all of the test 
subjects and almost all of the research assistants. Only a 
few loyal individuals remain by my side. I could not stop 
them. ■
JUNE 23
After a re-evaluation of the current situation, the decision 
is made: Project Eden will continue. New test subjects, with 
improved genetic code, will be created. ■



--- PAGE 252

16
2 5 0
GAmemaster’s Section
Now, after more than 20 years on Earth, Retz-
ius is obsessed with the idea of “correcting the 
mistake” of the Alpha Mutants and replacing them 
with her own “improved” version – the Omega Mu-
tants. She is an old woman now, and not quite as 
on top of things as she once was. She can switch 
between murderous rage, deep confusion and sud-
den tenderness toward the PCs, as if they were 
her own children – and then suddenly try to kill 
them again.
When lucid, Retzius calls the PCs “freaks” and 
treats them with contempt. But she also wants to tell 
them about Project Eden and explain her version 
of what happened. She will deploy her Omega Mu-
tants and the Titan (below) to defend her if attacked, 
and she will draw her Maser Pistol if cornered only. 
If she feels that she is losing the battle, she will try 
to start the launch sequence for the rocket in the 
silo and then try to flee in the capsule.
Retzius always has her research assistant 
Melvind at her side (below), but he is little more 
than a mindless drone.
a ttributes:  Strength 3, Agility 4, Wits 5, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Move 2, Shoot 3, Comprehend 5, Heal 4.
g ea
r:  Retzius wears a protective suit that gives her Armor 
Rating 3 against both damage and the Rot. In a holster, she 
carries a Maser Pistol (see the boxed text below).
THE OMEGA MUTANTS
After the meltdown of Project Eden, Doctor Retzius 
worked desperately to create “perfect” mutants in 
the Genetics Lab. After a series of failed attempts, 
all ending up in the Crematorium or in vats of for-
maldehyde, she succeeded in creating a breed of 
THE MASER PISTOL
Doctor Retzius’s firearm looks like noth-
ing the PCs have ever seen out in the 
Zone. It’s an energy weapon called a 
Maser Pistol. Maser is an acronym for 
Microwave Amplification by Stimulated 
Emission of Radiation. It is a light item 
with Gear Bonus +2, weapon damage 3 
and Short range. The gun emits a pow-
erful burst of energy that is invisible to 
the naked eye, but creates an explosion-
like effect when it hits a solid surface. 
The best thing about the Maser Pistol is 
that it does not require any bullets. The 
energy stored in the pistol will last

--- PAGE 253

16
2 5 1
THE PATH TO EDEN
mutants she calls “Omega” – the final species. They 
are fast and strong, resilient to physical damage and 
Rot, and have the ability to suck energy from their 
victims. However, their intelligence and speech are 
limited, about on level of a human three-year-old 
child.
Appearance:  The Omega Mutants are hairless 
and their bodies are covered by thick and dark 
lizard-like grey scales. Their eyes are also reptil-
ian. They can navigate in pitch darkness using a 
form of sonar, emitting a squealing noise painful 
to humans and Alpha Mutants. You can use this 
sound to scare the players when the PCs are ex-
ploring Eden.
Behavior: There is a total of ten Omega Mutants in 
Eden. Most are kept behind bars in the Cell Block 
in the Lower Circle, but Doctor Retzius often lets 
out one or two at a time to be experimented on or 
to carry out physical labor. When Retzius realizes 
that there are intruders in Eden, she will release 
more Omega Mutants to hunt them. She is reluctant 
however to let them all out, fearing another revolt. 
This fear is not unfounded – some of the Omega 
Mutants have a vague dream of freedom. These 
doubters may view the PCs arrival as a chance to 
break out of their slavery.
Language: The Omega Mutants’ speech is limited 
and hard to understand for others. A PC who wants 



--- PAGE 254

16
2 5 2
GAmemaster’s Section
to Manipulate an Omega Mutant must first speak 
to it for a while and make a Comprehend roll.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 4, Wits 2, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Fight 4, Move 4, Sneak 5, Scout 4.
a rm
or:  The Omega Mutants’ thick scales give them Armor 
Rating 6 against both damage and Rot.
w ea
pons:  Claws and fangs (weapon damage 2).
Mutations:  As opposed to the Alpha Mutants, the Omega 
Mutants all have the same mutations: Parasite and Sonar. All 
start out with 5 MP .
THE TITAN
In one of the cells in the Cell Block, Retzius keeps a 
horribly mutated creature whom she calls the Titan. 
It is an early failed prototype of the Omega Mu-
tants that completely lacks the capacity for higher 
intelligence. Retzius kept the Titan alive anyway, 
because it exhibited extreme aggressiveness and 
resilience – two attributes that she wanted to instill 
in the Omega Mutants.
If Retzius has her back against a corner, she may 
very well release the Titan. It is completely mind-
less and will try to kill and eat every living thing 
in its path. The Titan looks like a 10 feet long slug 
with a large ring-shaped maw, ringed by three-inch 
long spike-like teeth. It normally moves slowly, but 
is capable of sudden attacks with unexpected speed 
and power.
a ttributes:  Strength 10.
Skills:  Fight 5.
w ea
pons:  Maw (weapon damage 1). A target that is hit 
and suffers one or more points of damage will be partially 
engulfed by the maw and suffers a new attack every turn 
until the victim or the Titan is broken. If the Titan is damaged, 
it will immediately heal one point of damage for every point 
suffered by the victim. While trapped in the maw, the victim 
can Fight or Shoot the Titan, but perform no other action. The 
Titan dies if it is broken.
THE LAB ASSISTANTS
In the Cryolab, Doctor Retzius keeps three of her 
trusted lab assistants – Reodor, Solan and Redic – 
in cryonic sleep. The fourth, Melvind, is awake and 
can usually be found by Retzius’s side. All of them 
are unmutated humans.
Retzius keeps her assistants mostly frozen in or-
der to prolong their lives, so that they can continue 
Project Eden after her death. However, the repeated 


--- PAGE 255

16
2 5 3
THE PATH TO EDEN
w eapons:  Scrap knife.
Mutations:  Reptilian, Sonar (3 MP).
EVENTS
In this section, suggested events and encounters 
during the PCs’ visit to Eden are listed. They don’t 
need to come in any particular order, and you de-
cide which you want to use. Most of the events are 
more suitable in the Lower Circle, but the first signs 
of Endel and the Omega Mutants should occur in 
the Upper Circle already.
 K A PC hears a sound or sees movement in 
the corner of the eye. It’s either Endel or an 
Omega Mutant. A Dog Handler PC or one 
with the Tracker mutation can follow the trail, 
and even confront the creature. This event 
can be used multiple times.
 K A chilling shriek echoes through the cata-
combs of Eden. It’s an Omega Mutant using 
his Sonar to navigate in the darkness.
 K A dead video monitor suddenly flickers to life. 
Bright green text appears against the black 
screen. “Turn back while you still can,” it says. 
Doctor Retzius has spotted the intruders and 
this is her first warning.
 K Doctor Retzius speaks directly to the PCs 
through the bunker’s old loudspeaker system. 
She warns them and tells them to leave “this 
restricted area”, but does not reveal who she 
is and does not respond to questions. The 
players may believe the voice comes from an 
automated system. Retzius may contact the 
PCs several times in this manner.
 K The PCs find Endel’s den in a small service 
room. There are blankets, trash and moldy old 
crackers here, as well as old children’s draw-
ings that Endel has saved.
 K Endel reveals himself to the PCs. A good op-
portunity to use this event is when the PCs 
have gotten into serious trouble, or if they get 
stuck and don’t know how to proceed. Endel 
is on his guard and scared of the PCs, but 
also hope they can help him escape.
 K One or more Omega Mutants ambush the 
PCs. The attack is quick and sudden, perhaps 
from the ceiling. Remember that the Omega 
Mutants know the facility very well. If the PCs 
seem to be losing the battle, Endel can step 
in to help them. The Omega Mutants will not 
fight to the death unless told so by Retzius, 
preferring to retreat and attack again later.
 K A wounded Omega M

--- PAGE 256

16
2 5 4
GAmemaster’s Section
 K The countdown to the rocket launch starts. If 
the PCs do not activate the countdown them-
selves, have Retzius or even Endel do it.
THE END
The faceoff in Eden can end in many different ways, 
but sooner or later the PCs will confront Doctor 
Retzius. Make sure the players get most of the an-
swers they have sought – this is their final chance 
to learn the truth about the People and the Ark.
The confrontation with Retzius can end in vio-
lence. She will not let herself be taken captive, un-
less broken by trauma. If the fight goes against her, 
she will activate the launch sequence and make a 
run for the space capsule. If stopped, she will fight 
until broken. At that point, the Omega Mutants will 
stop fighting for her as well.
The Countdown: One way or another, the count-
down to the rocket launch will start. Unless the PCs 
activate it themselves, have Retzius, Endel, or one of 
the lab assistants do it. The countdown cannot be 
stopped. The players must immediately make the 
monumental decision of whether to leave Earth on 
the rocket or stay behind.
Toward the Stars:  If one or more PCs do want to 
go – pause the game for a minute and speak di-
rectly to the players, so that they fully understand 
the consequences of the decision. Explain that 
this will mean the campaign is over for these PCs 
– at least until a planned future expansion, about 
life in the solar system after the Fall, is released. 
In the meantime, the campaign in the Zone can 
continue, with other PCs. If one or more PCs go 
with the rocket, read or paraphrase the boxed text 
on this page.
Back to the Ark:  PCs that don’t want to leave Earth 
with the rocket can travel back home to the Ark. 
Finding Eden is a feat that causes great excite-
ment, but life in the Ark does not change that much. 
Chroniclers and Gearheads will certainly go out to 
study the bunker in detail, but the technology is so 
far advanced that it is hard to understand and learn 
from. Increase the Ark’s DEV levels in Technology 
and Culture by 2D6 each, then continue the game. 



--- PAGE 257

16
2 5 5
THE PATH TO EDEN
A possibility is that the People choose to move to 
Eden and settle there.
An open question is what happens to any 
Omega Mutants and cryo-frozen lab assistants 
that survive. Maybe they join the People (if al-
lowed), maybe they flee into the Zone toward an 
uncertain fate.
THE LAUNCH
All you hear is your own breath against the 
glass visor and the calm female voice, count-
ing down. “T minus 10 seconds. 9, 8, 7, 6, 5”. 
Memories from the Ark flash before your eyes. 
Of the People. Of your friends. The living. The 
dead. “4, 3, 2”. No return. “1”. The capsule 
shakes, a shiver in your seats grows to a roar. 
Behind your backs, a pillar of fire lights up. 
Y ou are pushed into your seats, you feel your 
veins struggling to keep blood flowing to your 
heads. The vibrations get worse, your teeth 
clatter, the instruments on the panel in front of 
you become a madly blinking blur. The roar 
gets louder, hammering at your eardrums. 
Then, a respite, a sudden silence. Metal rubs 
against metal, something comes loose. Then, 
the next kick. The roar and the vibrations are 
back, closer, hotter. Y ou feel the heat of the fire 
right through the metal and the plastic, right 
through your shaking bodies, kicked off the 
surface of the Earth. A small light in front of 
you is buzzing, angrily red. Warning. Warn-
ing. Warning. Then, it’s over. The roar is gone, 
the utter silence deafening. The vibrations re-
placed by absolute stillness. Y our bodies, lead 
heavy a second ago, now weightless. Sound-
lessly, the canopy around your capsule falls off. 
Bright light cuts through the portholes. It’s black 
out there. But not dark. Above you, the stars 
paint their way. Beneath you, the ravaged 
Earth curves off, covered in a yellowy haze. In 
front of you – a weak light, growing stronger, 
above the bent horizon. Not a star. An outpost. 
A city of glittering metal. A new home.
OTHER METAPLOTS
The game is not over because Eden has been found. 
You can easily create your own metaplots, provid-
ing material for your campaign for many sessions. 
The new metaplots can take many different forms. 
Below are some guidelines for creating metaplots, 
followed b

--- PAGE 258

16
2 5 6
GAmemaster’s Section
medical care and a disciplined militia. A market-
place is established inside the walls of the settlement, 
which rapidly becomes a major power in the Zone.
Humans and mutants unite in the fight against 
a common enemy, such as the Helldrivers or the 
Nova Cult. Together, they are victorious, and a for-
mal alliance is formed. The People quickly come 
to depend on their human neighbors, who provide 
medical care, grub and work in all kinds of projects. 
The human settlement expands and soon grows 
into a proper town.
A new watchtower is to be built in the human 
settlement. Many of the People take part in the 
work. Then – disaster strikes! The tower collapses, 
and several mutants die. A wild protest breaks out, 
tearing a rift between mutants and humans. But 
most mutants remain dependent on their new hu-
man masters.
More humans arrive by the dozens, in trailers 
drawn by Bitterbeasts. The population of the hu-
man settlement doubles in a matter of weeks. New 
houses are built, trade routes with other factions 
in the Zone are established. Some of the humans 
grow very rich, while most of the mutants remain 
dirt poor. Discontent is brewing.
The conflict between humans and mutants 
intensifies. A militant human faction holds hate-
stirring speeches in the marketplace, preaching that 
mutants are second-rate beings that have no place 
in the dawnworld. Some mutants are caught and 
beaten or burnt to death.
The mutants have had enough of the abuse. In 
secret, they plan an attack against the humans. A 
bloodbath is imminent unless someone – the PCs? 
– can defuse the situation and give mutants and 
humans a common purpose.
THE HYDRA
A strange humanoid is seen close to the Ark. It 
looks like a mutant, but is far too big – twelve feet 
tall, they say. The giant is very dangerous, Stalkers 
have seen it kill monsters with his bare hands. The 
killings instill the creatures of the Zone with fearful 
respect. A horde of monsters and savage mutants 
follow this strange leader wherever it goes. Every-
one who tries to oppose it is slaughtered.
The giant, whom followers call “the Hydra”, 
is a near-immortal creature, a result of ancient 

--- PAGE 259

2 5 7
Index
a
Acid Rain  18 4
Acid Spit (mutation)  70
A
ctions  80
A
dmirer (talent)  65
A
ge  17
A
gility  18
A
gitator (talent)  65
A
iming  85
A
mbush  82
A
mphibian (mutation)  71
A
rcheologist (talent)  65
A
rk Map  98
A
rk Sheet  26
9, 271
Ark, the  97
A
rmor  88
A
rtifact Cards  13
A
rtifacts  18
9
Assassin (talent)  65
A
ssembly  10
3
Attributes  18
A
twood, Jeremiah  23
1
Automaton  17
7
b
Bad Omens (talent)  65
B
argaining Position  82
B
arge Through (talent)  63
B
asic Skills  48
B
east Mutants  17
1
Big Dream  22
B
ig Smoke, the  11
7
Bitterbeast  17
8
Bloodhound (talent)  64
B
odyguard (talent)  65
B
onesaw (talent)  65
B
ooze  93
B
oss  38
B
roken  89
B
utcher (talent)  65
c
Character Sheets  11 , 265
Chronicler  36
C
lose Combat  83
C
ombat Maps  82
C
ombat Veteran (talent)  66
C
ommand Center Delta  23
6
Commander (talent)  65
C
ommand (skill)  60
C
omprehending Artifacts  12
4
Comprehend (skill)  51
C
onditions  92
C
onfusion  88
C
ool Head (talent)  66
C
orpse-Eater (mutation)  71
C
ounselor (talent)  66
C
oup De Grace  89
C
over  89
C
oward (talent)  66
C
reating a Sector  15
5
Critical Injuries  90
C
ritical Injuries Table  91
C
ulture  10
1
Cynic (talent)  65
D
D6  11
D
66  11
D
666  11
D
amage  88
D
arkness  93
D
awn Vault, the  11
3
Dead Apple, the  12
0
Death  90
D
econtamination  12
6
Defense  84
D
ehydrated  92
D
en  24
D
EV  se
e ‘Development Levels’
Development Levels  10
0
Dice  11
D
og Handler  34
D
oubt  88
e
The Elder  99
E
lysium  23
3
Empathy  18
E
nclave War, the  23
3
Encumbrance  23
E
ndure (skill)  48
E
nforcer  26
E
nhancing Effects  70
E
vents in the Ark  13
1
Events in the Zone  13
4
Experience Points  25
E
xplosions  94
E
xtreme Reflexes (mutation)  72
f
Failure  44
F
ast Draw (talent)  66
F
ast-Forwarding  14
F
atigue  88
F
ight Dog (talent)  64
F
ight (skill)  49
F
ind The Path (skill)  56
F
irst Session  13
7
Fixer  32
F
lame Breather (mutation)  72
F
leeing  81
F
lyweight (talent)  66
F
ood Supply  10
1
For a Mouthful of Water  20
1
Force (skill)  49
F
our-Armed (mutation)  72
F
rog Legs (mutation)  72
F
uel  94
F
ull-Auto Fire  86
g
Gadgeteer (talent)  66
G
amemaster, the  9
Ga
me Principles  12
9
Gear  22
G
ear B

--- PAGE 260

2 5 8
Mutant: Year Zero
General Talents  65
G
M  se
e ‘Gamemaster, the’
Good Footwork (talent)  66
G
rappling  84
G
unslingers (talent)  65
h
Hard Hitter (talent)  66
H
ealing  90
H
eal (skill)  53
H
eavy & Light Items  23
H
elldrivers  17
3, 217
Human Magnet (mutation)  73
H
umanoids  17
0
Human Plant (mutation)  73
H
ybrid Play  14
H
ypothermic  93
i
Individual Play  14
I
nitiative Roll  79
I
nsectoid (mutation)  73
I
nsect Wings (mutation)  73
I
nspire (skill)  59
I
ntimidate (skill)  54
I
nventor (talent)  63
j
Jack of All Trades (talent)  66
J
uicy Info (talent)  64
J
ury-Rig (skill)  54
K
Know the Zone (skill)  52
l
Light Eater (talent)  67
L
oner (talent)  67
L
uminescence (mutation)  74
M
Make a Deal (skill)  57
M
anbeast (mutation)  74
M
aneuvers  80
M
anipulate (skill)  53
M
ap of the Zone  14
M
ean Streak (talent)  63
M
elee Weapons  86
M
etaplots, Other  25
5
Mimir  23
3
Mind Terror (mutation)  74
M
isfire  69
M
odification  47
M
onster Hunter (talent)  64
M
onsters  17
6
Morlocks  17
3
Motorhead (talent)  63
M
ovement  80
M
ove (skill)  50
M
utant Card Deck, the  12
M
utant’s Best Friend (talent)  65
M
utation Cards  13
M
utations  69
n
Name  18
N
ever Surrender (talent)  67
N
oatun  23
3
Non-Player Characters  13
8
Non-Typical Damage  92
N
ova Cultists  17
3
Nova Cult, the  21
2
NPC  se
e ‘Non-Player Characters’
o
Other Ark, the  20 7
P
Pack Mule (talent)  67
P
arasite (mutation)  75
P
athokinesis (mutation)  75
P
C  se
e ‘Player Character’
Performer (talent)  65
P
ermanent Rot Points  12
6
Permanent Trauma  70
P
ersonal Arithmetic (talent)  67
P
henomena  18
4
Player Character  17
P
layers  8
Pr
oject Eden  23
1
Projects  10
2
Puppeteer (mutation)  74
P
ure Plant, the  20
4
Pushed Damage  92
P
ushing  44
P
yrokinesis (mutation)  75
r
Racketeering  61
R
acketeer (talent)  65
R
ange  80
R
anged Combat  84
R
anged Weapons  87
R
azorback  18
0
Reactive Effects  70
R
ebel (talent)  65
R
ecovery  89
R
elationships  22
R
eloading  85
R
epairs  55
R
eptilian (mutation)  76
R
esilient (talent)  65
R
etzius, Doctor  24
7
Role  17
R
ot Attack  12
6
Rot-Eater (mutation)  76
R
ot Finder (talent)  64
R
ot Hotspot  18
6
Rot Level  12
5
Rot, the  12
4
Ruins  16


--- PAGE 261

2 5 9
Index
Sharpshooter (talent)  67
S
hields  88
S
hoot (skill)  50
S
ic a Dog (skill)  58
S
kills  43
S
lave  40
S
leepless  93
S
leepless (talent)  67
S
neak Attack  82
S
neak (skill)  50
S
ocial Conflicts  82
S
onar (mutation)  76
S
pecialist Skills  54
S
pores (mutation)  76
S
printer (mutation)  77
S
talker  30
S
tarving  92
S
toic (talent)  67
S
trength  18
S
tunts  43
S
ucker Punch (talent)  63
t
Talents  63
T
eam Play  14
T
echnology  10
1
Telepathy (mutation)  77
T
herapist (talent)  67
T
hreat Cards  12
T
hreat Level  15
8
Threats Against the Ark  14
5
Threats in the Zone  16
9
Tinkerer (talent)  64
T
iny Items  24
T
itan Powers, the  23
2
Tracker (mutation)  77
T
rauma  88
T
ypical Session  15
u
Unexploded Ordnance  18 7
v
Vehicles  94
V
icious Creep (talent)  64
w
Wanderers  17 4
Warfare  10
1
Weapons  86
W
eapon Specialist (talent)  67
W
heeler Dealer (talent)  64
W
its  18
W
orkhorse (talent)  66
W
ork Points  10
3
x
XP  see ‘Experience Points’
Z
Zone Cook (talent)  67
Z
one Expeditions  12
3
Zone-Ghouls  17
6
Zone Leeches  18
3
Zone Log  27
0, 272
Zone Map, the  11
7
Zone Rats  18
2
Zone Sectors  20
1
Zone Smog  18
7
Zone Travel  12
2



--- PAGE 262

2 6 0
Mutant: Year Zero
i te M c o S t r eq uire M en t w ei ght c o MM en t
Grub (Ration) 1 — ¼ Restores Strength.
Clean Water (Ration) ½ — ¼ Restores Agility.
Booze (Dose) ¼ — 1 per bottle A bottle can contain 10 doses.
Arrow ½ — ¼ —
Rope 1 — 1 Gear Bonus +2 to Move roll when climbing.
Grappling Hook 1 — 1 Gear Bonus +2 to Move roll when climbing 
(requires rope).
Torch ½ — ¼ Lights up the area within Near distance for 
an hour.
Oil Lantern 1–2 — 1 Lights up the area within Near distance. One 
dose of booze lasts a day.
Tinderbox 1 — ½ Used to light torches and oil lanterns.
Flashlight 3–6 Workshop, 
Battery 1 Lights up the area within Near distance.
Jacket/Coat 1–2 — - Gear Bonus +2 to Endure severe cold.
Boots 1–2 — - Gear Bonus +1 to Endure a harsh Zone trek.
Spade 1 — 1 Gear Bonus +1 to any roll to work on an Ark 
project.
Blanket 1 — 1 Gear Bonus +2 to Endure severe cold.
Tent 3–6 — 2 Gear Bonus +1 to Endure severe cold for 
every occupant.
Rot Suit 4–8 — - Protection Rating 3 against the Rot.
Scrap Binoculars 3–6 — ½ Gear Bonus +1 to Scout.
Tools 1–2 — 1 Gear Bonus +1 to Jury-Rig.
Pots & Pans 1–2 — 1 Gear Bonus +1 when cooking Rot-contami-
nated food (page 67)
Brass Knuckles 1 — ½ Gear Bonus +1 to Fight, weapon damage 1.
Scrap Knife 1 — ½ Gear Bonus +1 to Fight, weapon damage 2.
Baseball Bat 1 — 1 Gear Bonus +2 to Fight, weapon damage 1.
GEAR & SERVICES
The list below contains items and services com-
monly traded in the Ark. The cost (in bullets) is only 
a guideline – remember, there are no set prices in 
the Ark. Requirement tells you what projects need to 
be completed in the Ark for the item to be generally 
available. Weight tells you how many lines on you 
gear list that the item requires.



--- PAGE 263

2 6 1
Gear & Services
i te M c o S t r eq uire M en t w ei ght c o MM en t
Spiked Bat 1–2 — 1 Gear Bonus +2 to Fight, weapon damage 2.
Machete 1–2 — 1 Gear Bonus +2 to Fight, weapon damage 2.
Scrap Spear 1–2 — 1 Gear Bonus +1 to Fight, weapon damage 2, 
Near range.
Scrap Axe 3–6 — 2 Gear Bonus +1 to Fight, weapon damage 3.
Slingshot 1 — ½ Gear Bonus +1 to Shoot, Short range, 
weapon damage 1.
Bow 1–2 — 1 Gear Bonus +1 to Shoot, Long range, weapon 
damage 1.
Scrap Pistol 3–6 Arsenal 1 Gear Bonus +1 to Shoot, Short range, 
weapon damage 2.
Scrap Rifle 4–8 Arsenal 1 Gear Bonus +1 to Shoot, Long range, weapon 
damage 2.
Derringer 3–6 Arsenal ½ Gear Bonus +1 to Shoot, Near range, 
weapon damage 1.
Flame Thrower 5–10 Arsenal 2 Gear Bonus +1 to Shoot, Near range, 
weapon damage 2.
Scrap Cannon 10+ Arsenal — Gear Bonus +1 to Shoot, Long range, weapon 
damage 4.
Bitterbeast Mount 5–10 Stables —
—
Dog 3–6 — — —
Pig 3–6 Pigsty — —
Slave 5–10 Slave Market — —
Healer 3–6 — — Heal skill level 3–5, Bonesaw talent.
Gearhead 10+ — — Jury-Rig skill level 3–5
Stalker 4–8 — — Cost per day. Find the Path skill level 3–5.
Bodyguard 3–6 — — Cost per day. Intimidate skill level 3–5.
Chronicler 3–6 — — Writes a poem of your choice.



--- PAGE 264

2 6 2
Mutant: Year Zero
D666 i te M
111 Action figure (He-Man)
112 Alarm clock, mechanical
113 Aquarium, no fish
114 Barbie doll
115 Baseball bat (page 86)
116 Basket ball, flat
121 Beard trimmer
122 Beret, red
123 Bible
124 Bicycle chain (page 86)
125 Bicycle frame, no wheels
126 Bicycle pump
131 Binder, full of financial records
132 Boots (Gear Bonus +1 when hiking)
133 Bouncing ball
134 Box of cereal, unopened
135 Box of chocolates (still edible, D6 rations of grub)
136 Boxing glove
141 Briefcase
142 Bullhorn (broken)
143 Can opener
144 Candelabra
145 Car tire
146 Carving knife
151 Cash register
152 Cat 5 cable, 2D6 feet long
153 Ceiling fan
154 Champagne glasses, D6
155 Chandelier
156 Charcoal grill
161 Children’s drawing
162 Cigarettes, half-empty pack
163 Clothes hanger
164 Coffee cup with print
165 Coffee table
166 Coloring book for kids (half done)
211 Comb
D666 i te M
212 Comic book, very violent
213 Concrete mixer, rusty
214 Cooking pot
215 Credit card
216 Crime novel
221 Cutlery, D6 pieces
222 Cylinder hat
223 Dala horse
224 Deodorant bottle
225 Desk lamp
226 Detergent, bottle
231 Dice, D6
232 Diving snorkel
233 Doll
234 Downhill ski (only one)
235 Dress shoes, worn down
236 Dumbbell, 10 lb
241 Easel, for painting
242 Eating knife (scrap knife)
243 Electric guitar, broken
244 Electric mixer
245 Electric shaver
246 Electric toothbrush
251 Empty frame
252 Extension cord
253 Face mask, Donald Duck
254 Face mask, skeleton
255 Facemask, Santa Claus
256 Fake fangs
261 False teeth
262 Fantasy novel, very thick
263 Fire extinguisher
264 Fireworks, D6, still functional
265 Flashlight, broken
266 Floor lamp
311 Flute, plastic
312 Folding chair
Scrap table



--- PAGE 265

2 6 3
Scrap Table
D666 i te M
313 Football
314 Fork
315 Frying pan (blunt instrument)
316 Gaffer tape
321 Glass pearls
322 Golf club (blunt instrument)
323 Grass seeds in small bag
324 Hair dryer
325 Hair gel
326 Headphones, with microphone
331 Hedge trimmer (scrap knife)
332 Herbal salt
333 Hockey club (blunt instrument)
334 Hot dog cart
335 Hubcap, Volvo
336 IKEA chair
341 Infant formula (gives D6 rations of grub)
342 Instant coffee
343 Instant noodles (D6 rations of grub)
344 Iron pipe (blunt instrument)
345 Jack
346 Jeans, stonewashed
351 Jigsaw puzzle
352 Jumpsuit, cloth
353 Key ring, 2D6 keys
354 Keyboard, missing a few keys
355 Ladder, rusty (Gear Bonus +1 when climbing)
356 Ladies boots
361 Ladies hat
362 Laptop computer, broken
363 Lawn mower
364 Light bulbs, D6
365 Lipstick
366 Liquid soap
411 Loudspeaker (broken)
412 Love letter, yellowed
413 Magnifying glass
D666 i te M
414 Mascara
415 Mathematics book
416 Microwave oven (broken)
421 Mirror
422 Movie DVDs, D6
423 Movie poster
424 Music CDs, D6
425 National flag, torn
426 Necktie
431 Nicotine chewing gum
432 Oriental carpet
433 Pacifier
434 Pack of tube socks
435 Paper handkerchiefs, D666
436 Pepper mill
441 Photo album
442 Photo of happy family
443 Picture of a cat
444 Piggy bank (empty)
445 Plastic bags, D66
446 Plastic bottle, empty
451 Plastic dinosaur
452 Plastic flowers, D6
453 Plastic skeleton model
454 Plastic straws, pack of 100
455 Playing cards
456 Popcorn, unopened bag
461 Princess dress, for kids
462 Prize medal
463 Quilted jacket (Gear Bonus +1 against cold)
464 Rabbit suit, adult size
465 Recliner
466 Remote control
511 Roller skates
512 Rubber boot
513 Rubber duck
514 Saxophone



--- PAGE 266

2 6 4
Mutant: Year Zero
D666 i te M
515 Scarf, colorful (Gear Bonus +1 against cold)
516 Scientific dissertation
521 Scuba mask
522 Scuba suit, worn out
523 Sex toy
524 Shopping cart
525 Skateboard
526 Sketch book, full of sketches
531 Ski boot
532 Ski hat (Gear Bonus +1 against cold)
533 Skin lotion, bottle
534 Sleeping pad
535 Snowglobe
536 Sofa, broken
541 Spider-Man suit for kids
542 Sports bottle
543 Sports jersey
544 Sports prize cup
545 Stapler
546 Starburst candy (one ration of grub)
551 Stroller
552 Surf board
553 Suspenders
554 Swimming goggles
555 Synthesizer
556 T-shirt with text “Heisenberg”
561 Tabletop globe
562 Teddy bear
563 Telephone
564 Tennis ball
565 Thermometer, broken
566 Tire iron
611 Toilet brush
612 Toothbrush
613 Towel marked "Sheraton"
D666 i te M
614 Toy car
615 Toy pirates
616 Toy sword
621 Toy tractor
622 Toy train set
623 Traffic cones, D6
624 Trombone
625 TV set, broken
626 Twinkies, D6 (still edible, each is a ration of 
grub)
631 Typewriter
632 Umbrella, broken
633 Underwear
634 Vacuum cleaner
635 Vacuum flask
636 Vase
641 VHS cassette
642 Video game console
643 Vinyl record, well played
644 Walking frame
645 Walkman with headphones and cassette
646 Wall clock
651 Wallet full of moldy cash
652 Water pistol
653 Welding mask
654 Whiskey bottle (empty)
655 Whiteboard marker
656 Wig, blonde
661 Wine bottle, undrinkable (1 Rot Point)
662 Wok
663 Wrecking bar
664 Wristwatch, broken
665 Yellowed copy of the Mutant Chronicles RPG
666 Yo-yo (blunt instrument)



--- PAGE 267

We shall not cease from exploration
And the end of all our exploring
Will be to arrive where we started
And know the place for the first time.
Four Quartets, T.S. Eliot



--- PAGE 268

We walked among gaping ruins and rusty car wrecks, monuments to the 
fall of the Ancients. Naphta had been taken by a Deathworm and the 
Rot had driven Hugust insane. We had no grub left and there was only 
rotwater to drink. But we had to keep going. We had to find Eden. We 
could not return to the Ark empty-handed, the fate of the People rested on 
our shoulders. Suddenly, Franton, the insect-like Stalker leading our way 
through the wasteland, stopped. “Zone-Ghouls”, he hissed, drawing his 
scrap rifle. I inhaled, ready to spew out a cascade of flames at anyone 
who dared come close. In the next instant, a chilling shriek rose from the 
ruins around us.
Mutant: Year Zero  takes you to the world after the great Apocalypse. Humanity’s proud 
civilization has fallen. The cities are dead wastelands, winds sweeping along empty streets
turned into graveyards. But life remains. Among the ruins, the People live. You are the 
heirs of humanity – but not quite human anymore. Your bodies and minds are capable 
of superhuman feats. You are mutants.
The Mutant RPG franchise has three decades of rich history in Sweden, with the first 
edition released in 1984. This is the game that later developed into Mutant Chronicles  to 
widespread acclaim. Now, for the first time, a version of the original, post-apocalyptic 
shade of Mutant is released to an international audience. This brand new version of the 
classic game contains material for hundreds of hours of game time:
freeleaguepublishing.com
modiphius.com/mutant
© 2014 Paradox Entertainment AB.
MUTANT and related logos, characters, names, 
and distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks 
of Paradox Entertainment AB unless otherwise 
noted. Used with permission. All rights reserved.
MUH050020MZ
K  Create a unique mutant player 
c
haracter – including skills, talents, 
mutations, gear and relationships –  
in mere minutes.
K   Push your character’s skills to their 
limits, releasing amazing mutant powers 
in the process.
K   Fight fast and furious battles, making 
e
very bullet count and using a detailed 
list of gruesome critical injuries.
K  Set your game in one of the Zones 
p
rovided – The Big Smoke and The 
Dead Apple
