--- PAGE 96

06
9 4
Player’s Section
to make a Scout roll to get a good look at them. 
That roll does not count as an action in conflicts 
– you can Scout and attack in the same turn. You 
can’t Shoot at targets at Short range or more in 
total darkness.
EXPLOSIONS
In some parts of the Zone, the ground is covered by 
deep craters, traces of the Ancients’ mighty weap-
ons of mass destruction. Such weapons are rare now, 
if they exist at all, but Gearheads can Jury-Rig some 
pretty powerful explosive charges (page 54).
The force of an explosion is measured in Blast 
Power. When the detonation occurs, the GM – or the 
player whose PC built the bomb – rolls a number of 
Base Dice equal to the Blast Power for each person 
within Near range of the blast. For every / rolled, 
the victim suffers one point of damage. The roll 
cannot be pushed. Victims at Arm’s Length from 
the detonation suffer one extra point of damage.
Effect Radius:  Powerful charges, with a Blast Power 
of 7 or more, can harm people even at Short range. 
The Blast Power is then reduced by 6. If there are 
many people within Short range of the blast, the 
GM can simplify the process by rolling just one 
roll and apply the result to all victims.
Shrapnel: Normal explosions have a weapon 
damage of 1 – the damage is simply equal to 
the number of / rolled (except at Arm’s Length, 
where it is one more). A mean Gearhead 
can arm his bomb with small bits of scrap, like ball 
bearings or nails, to increase the effect. This is a 
stunt when using the Jury-Rig skill. If so armed, the 
Blast Power of the bomb is increased to 2.
Vehicles:  Explosions can harm vehicles (below). 
Roll for the damage to the vehicle as it was a person.
E X A M P L E
Naphta has built a pipe bomb with Blast Power 9 
and weapon damage 2. When it detonates, one Zone-
Ghoul is within Near distance. Naphta rolls two /, 
which together with the weapon damage inflicts 
three points of damage on the Zone-Ghoul. Within 
Short range, there are five more Zone-Ghouls. They 
are exposed to a blast with Blast Power 3. Naphta 
rolls a joint roll for them, and gets one /. The five 
Zone-Ghouls suffer two points of damage each.
VEHICLES
In the Zone, there are

--- PAGE 97

06
9 5
Conflict & Trauma
Zone Travel:  Riding in a vehicle, exploring a sector 
of the Zone map requires half the time compared 
to walking (page 122).
VEHICLES IN COMBAT
In a conflict, you can move faster in a vehicle than 
on foot. Every maneuver spent on movement counts 
as two. For example, with only one maneuver you 
can move directly from Short distance to Arm’s 
Length, or from Long to Short distance.
Escaping From Danger:  In a tight spot you can 
use your vehicle to escape. Roll to Move as usual, 
but use the Gear Bonus of the vehicle.
Ramming Enemies: Most vehicles can be used as 
weapons, to simply run over your enemies. The at-
tack must occur at Arm’s Length. Roll to Fight, but 
use your Agility and your Move skill instead. The 
weapon damage is normally 1, but can be increased 
by a Gearhead (page 56).
E X A M P L E
The Gearhead Naphta has found an old Volvo (Gear 
Bonus +3) and got it running again. She wants to 
ram a savage mutant from Short range. She uses 
her maneuver in the turn to get to Arm’s Length, 
and then uses her action to ram her enemy. She rolls 
three Base Dice (Agility 3) two Skill Dice (Move skill 
2) and three Gear Dice. She initially fails her roll but 
decides to push it, ending up with one 
  and two /. 
The savage mutant suffers two points of damage, but 
the Volvo’s Gear Bonus is decreased to +2.
DAMAGE TO VEHICLES
Just like any other gear, vehicles can break down 
and lose Gear Bonus when you use them. When the 
Gear Bonus reaches zero, the vehicle won’t start any 
more, and needs to be repaired.
Resilience: The Gear Bonus of a vehicle can also 
be reduced by external damage. When a vehicle 
has taken a number of damage points equal to its 
Resilience rating, its Gear Bonus is reduced one 
step. When the total amount of damage inflicted 
on a vehicle reaches twice the Resilience rating, the 
Gear Bonus is reduced another step, and so on.
Armor:  Some vehicles have a metal hull protecting 
the vehicle itself and its occupants. Gearheads can 
improve the Armor Rating with the Jury-Rig skill.
Ramming a Vehicle: You can also use a vehicle to 
ram another vehicle – but only if your vehicle has 
an equal or higher Resilience r

--- PAGE 98





--- PAGE 99

07
9 7
The Ark
07
The Ark
The Ark is your home. This is where you have grown 
up together with the other mutants, protected from 
the horrors in the Zone around you. The Elder has 
kept you safe during the long winter, but the safe 
haven is no more. The Elder is dying. The People 
have become young adults, and grub is getting 
scarce. Mutant is turning on mutant, pacts are 
formed and plots whispered in the dark. But you 
must find a way to work together. The People of the 
Ark need to overcome their differences and find a 
new path forward. Evolve, build a new civilization 
on ruins of the old. If you can’t, the legacy of man-
kind will be lost forever.
CREATE YOUR ARK
The Ark, a settlement with a few hundred inhabit-
ants, is the starting point of the game. All PCs live 
in the Ark and have grown up there. Maybe you 
have never even left the Ark. The outside world, the 
Zone, is unknown and dangerous. Only Stalkers and 
other fools head out there.
To create your Ark is the first thing you should 
do when you have created your characters. It’s a 
simple process – just follow the steps below. Use 
the Ark Sheet at the end of this book, or download 
it from the Modiphius website.
1. ZONE LOCATION
Before you create the Ark itself, you need to deter-
mine what Zone it is in. Start by deciding where in 
the world the Zone is located. It may well be some-
where in your home country, or could be anywhere 
in the world. Preferably the Zone should, at least 
partly, contain the ruins of a city – why not your 
own home town?
Decide, as a group, what the general environ-
ment in the Zone looks like. Is it flat or hilly? What 
major rivers or coastlines are there, what landmarks?
Premade Zones: In the next chapter, you can find 
two premade Zone examples: The Dead Apple and 
The Big Smoke. You can choose to play in either of 
these Zones, or just use them only as inspiration 
for your own Zone.
2. THE ZONE MAP
The next step is to create a general map of the Zone. 
This map is based on reports from Stalkers or fad-
ing charts from the Old Age. On the inside covers of 
this book you will find maps of the two sample Zone 
mentioned above. You can choose either of these 
map

--- PAGE 100

07
9 8
Player’s Section
miles wide. You might think this is small, but re-
member that the Zone is a strange, labyrinthian 
landscape, often covered in smog – movement in 
the Zone is slow.
Most of the Zone map will be blank at the start 
of the game – only coastlines, major rivers or lakes, 
prominent landmarks and places rumored to hold 
great treasures or horrible dangers will be marked 
out. As play evolves, you will fill in the map (or the 
Zone Log) with details. Read more about exploring 
the Zone in the next chapter.
3. TYPE OF ARK
Once your Zone map is done, it’s time to look closer 
at the Ark itself and decide what it is. The People’s 
sanctuary may be located in a variety of different 
kinds of ruins from the Old Age. Examples:
 K Airplane Wreck
 K Bridge
 K Farm
 K Gated Community
 K Junkyard
 K Mall
 K Oil Rig
 K Prison
 K Scrap Village
 K Shelter
 K Shipwreck
 K Skyscraper
 K Small Island
 K Subway Station
 K Trailer Park
Discuss in the group and agree on something you 
all like.
4. ARK POSITION
Decide jointly in the group which sector to place 
the Ark in. Don’t put it right in the middle – the 
central parts of the Zone are usually those most 
contaminated by the Rot – but also not on the very 
edge. It is recommended, if not totally necessary, 
to place the Ark near the sea, a river or a large lake.
5. THE ARK MAP
The next step is to draw a rough map of the Ark, 
that will make it easier for you to visualize where 
things happen during play. Mark your PCs’ shelters 
on the map, as well as the Elder’s refuge (step 6 
below), the dens of the most important Bosses (step 
7) and the water source of the Ark (step 10).
In this chapter you will find two sample maps 
of typical Arks – a scrap village and a beached pas-
senger ferry. If you don’t have the time or the in-
clination to draw your own map, use one of these. 
You can also download the maps at www.modiphius.
com/mutant.
6. THE ELDER
Determine where in the Ark the Elder lives. He 
is rarely seen in person these days, but his den 
is still a hub of activity in the Ark and this is 
where the Chroniclers of the Dawn Vault (page 
113) most often can be found. Mark the spot on 
your Ark map.
7. TH

--- PAGE 101

07
9 9
The Ark
You should already have established some Bosses 
when creating your characters, and one of your 
PCs might even be a Boss himself. Before the 
game starts, it can be a good idea to describe the 
Bosses of the Ark a little, and even add one or 
two more. Bosses come in different types, see the 
list below.
BOSS TYPES
t he
 Despot.  Is obsessed with power and loves 
to demonstrate it. Lets others do his dirty 
work. Sees enemies everywhere. Reacts with 
extreme violence to any threats or signs of 
mutiny.
t he
 c om
mander.  Drills his underlings as if 
they were soldiers in an army. Does not mind 
getting blood on his own hands every now 
and then – that’s good for morale.
t he
 a gi
tator.  An inspiring figure who uses 
fiery speeches to make the People dream of a 
better future. Is able to rally the crowds and is 
often seen as a threat by other Bosses.
t he
 r ev
olutionary.  Wants to topple the Elder 
once and for all, and create a new, fair and 
equal order in the Ark. Wants to ban private 
ownership, demote all Bosses and introduce 
decision-making by consensus.
t he
 Kingpin.  Treats most of his underlings as 
little more than slaves – as his own private 
workforce. Often undertakes big and megalo-
maniacal projects, and doesn’t hesitate to use 
violence to get them done.
ABOUT THE ELDER
“Do you remember what it was like be-
fore the Elder got sick? He used to walk 
around in the Ark and talk. Talk and help 
us with anything we needed. During the 
days, it was school time and he taught the 
People to read and count. At night, we’d 
sit around the fires and listen to stories 
about the Old Age. The Elder said he 
hadn’t seen it with his own eyes, but that 
he had read books and seen moving im-
ages that showed what a fantastic time 
it must have been. When the Elder got 
sick, all that stopped. Maybe it’s the Rot 
that finally got to him. Maybe he’s just 
old. I don’t care which. I just want to sit 
in his lap again, to hear him talk about 
the green fields, the blue lakes and the 
great cities full of people.”
– Silas, Chronicler



--- PAGE 102

07
1 0 0
Player’s Section
t he b ureaucrat.  A low-key leader who rules 
by referring to the rules and commandments 
of the Elder. Thinks that the People should do 
as they always have.
t he
 c ul
tist.  Has attracted a fanatical cult to 
himself, and is seen as a divine being by his 
followers. Any doubt of the leader’s wisdom 
is punished harshly. Cults tend to isolate 
themselves and are often viewed upon with 
suspicion by the rest of the People.
t he
 c ol
lector.  Is obsessed with artifacts from 
the Old Age, and is constantly trying to ex-
pand his collection. Will never turn anything 
over to the Dawn Vault. Lives in his own world 
and rarely leaves his lair.
t he
 h ar
d w or
ker.  Prefers to stand knee-deep 
in the dirt and work side by side with his 
henchmen. Has no interest in plotting and 
scheming, and wants to build something new 
rather than dig into the past.
8. OTHER NPCs
When you created your characters, several NPCs 
were mentioned in the premade questions set out 
in your roles. These are NPCs that you either hate 
or want to keep safe.
Discuss these NPCs a little more, and let the 
GM take some notes about them. What are these 
NPCs like? What do they want? If you like, you can 
already expand the Ark with some further NPCs, 
but you don’t need to – the GM will introduce more 
NPCs during play. In Chapter 9, the GM will find 
typical stats for NPCs.
9. POPULATION
Decide exactly how many inhabitants the Ark has 
at the start of the game. Keep it around 200 – big 
enough to create fractions and gangs, but small 
enough for everyone to know everyone. The popula-
tion size is important because no children are born 
in the Ark, and after every game session some in-
habitants will have died – from violence, hunger or 
disease (page 115).
10. WATER SOURCE
Rot-free water is almost as rare and valuable as 
grub in the Ark – and thus, a source of power and 
influence. Decide what your source of clean water 
is. Some possibilities: an old well, an uncontami-
nated creek, a small purification device, a collector 
of rainwater, an old waterpipe.
11. DEVELOPMENT LEVELS
Distribute 12 points across the four Development 
Levels of the Ark (below).
12. THE

--- PAGE 103

07
1 0 1
The Ark
D EVELOPMENT  L EV ELS
f oo D  Su PP ly
The Food Supply DEV rating determines how hard it is to find something to eat in the Ark.
0–9 The struggle to find grub is desperate. The People only have a meagre stockpile of food left in the Ark, and whatever ed-
ible plants and animals individual mutants manage to grow or kill. One ration of grub is typically traded for one bullet.
10–19
Starvation still isn’t far away, but the People have enough grub to cover their day to day needs – as long as the harvest 
or the hunt isn’t threatened. Typically, you can get two rations of grub in return for one bullet. Decrease the Session Body 
Count (page 115) by one.
20–29 Almost everyone in the Ark can fill their stomach every day, and there is even enough to put some aside for hard times. A 
bullet will typically buy you three rations of grub. Decrease the Session Body Count by two (to a minimum of zero).
30+
No one in the Ark needs to go hungry. The People have the luxury to care about the taste of what they eat and drink, and 
they have refined their skills of cooking and brewing. A bullet will normally buy you four rations of grub. Decrease the 
Session Body Count by three (to a minimum of zero).
c ulture
The Culture DEV rating helps the People understand artifacts and other remains of the Old Age (page 124).
0–9 With the exception of Chroniclers, the People completely lack any form of cultural expression beyond tales by the trash-
can fire.
10–19 Most of the People can read and write to a basic level. Some forms of cultural expression – like a place of worship, simple 
staged plays or exhibitions of scrap and artifacts – may exist.
20–29 Writing skills are more advanced and widespread – there might even be an organized school. There are most likely sev-
eral forms of cultural expression in the Ark.
30–39 The People have learned much about the ideals of the Ancients, and might even have developed some form of extended 
suffrage and inclusive governance of the Ark.
technology
The most important use of the Technology DEV rating is to help the People to understand how artifacts are used.
0–9 Apart from Gearheads, none of the People really understand technology

--- PAGE 104

07
1 0 2
Player’s Section
Culture:  The People’s ability to express them-
selves in writing, art and other forms of cultural 
production.
Technology:  The People’s ability to understand 
artifacts and create new technical innovations.
Warfare: The Ark’s ability to defend itself against 
attacks, and stomp out enemies both outside and 
within its walls.
At the start of the game, you get to distribute 12 
points between these four DEVs. Do it in any way 
you like – you can set a DEV to zero if you like. Later 
in this chapter you will see what the DEVs actually 
mean in the game world. During the course of the 
game, you can increase the four DEVs in two ways:
 K You can let the People undertake projects.
 K Your PCs can turn in artifacts to the Dawn 
Vault.
E X A M P L E
Joanna’s group distributes 12 DEV points before 
starting the game. They set Food Supply to 0, Cul-
ture to 3, Technology to 3 and Warfare to 6.
THE PEOPLE’S PROJECTS
During the course of the game, you can develop 
the Ark by having the People undertake projects . A 
project can be anything from building a palisade or 
starting a mushroom farm to setting up a tribunal 
or opening a theater. A project does not only in-
volve your particular PCs directly, but is undertaken 
by a large section of the People.
On page 104 and onward, you will find a list of 
projects. All projects have minimum DEV ratings 
(the lowest possible score in one or several DEVs 
PLAYING WITH PROJECTS
How working on projects affects the role-
playing is up to you as a group. You can 
handle it summarily – just roll dice and 
move on – but the projects and work-
ing on them can also generate dramatic 
events played out in detail. Projects can 
be threatened or even sabotaged, often 
a source of desperate conflict. Projects 
can also be used as a backdrop for other 
events in the game.
Ex AMPLE  ARK : B EA CHED  C RU ISE  S HI P



--- PAGE 105

07
1 0 3
The Ark
for the project to be started) and a DEV bonus that 
is added to the DEV once the project is completed.
Choose projects carefully – the projects you un-
dertake determine what kind of society you create.
Zone Expeditions are a special type of project, and 
follow a different rule set. Read more about them 
in Chapter 8.
ASSEMBLY
At the start of every session, as long as one or more 
PCs are in the Ark, the players should hold an As-
sembly. That means you step out of your characters 
for a short while, and instead represent the entire 
People. Consider – as players, not as PCs – what 
projects you think the People should undertake. An 
Assembly follows these simple steps:
 K Discuss which projects you think the People 
should undertake at this time. Remember 
that you can’t start a project if the Ark’s DEV 
ratings are too low. You cannot choose a 
project that has been completed before (with 
some exceptions). If one or more projects are 
 alr
eady underway, you don’t need to start a 
new one.
 K After a few minutes of deliberation, each 
player can nominate a project that he thinks 
should be undertaken by the People. The 
players don’t need to agree on one project, 
but as we will see, projects will be completed 
much faster if they do.
 K Every player that has chosen a project notes 
it down on the Ark map and on the Ark Sheet 
(at the back of the book). Also note how many 
Work Points remain to complete the project.
WORK POINTS
The list of projects (below) tells you how much work 
a certain project needs to be completed, measured 
in so called Work Points. The number of Work 
Points is always multiplied by the number of PCs 
in your group. Thus, a Palisade needs 4 Work Points 
for a group with four PCs, but only 2 Work Points 
in a group with two PCs.
WORKING ON PROJECTS
That a project has been started doesn’t mean that it 
will be completed. For a project to progress during a 
session, your characters  must work on it. Of course, 
it’s not just your PCs who are actually working, but 
their interest is used as an indicator of the commit-
ment of the People as a whole.
Whenever you like during the session, as long 
as you are in the Ark, yo

--- PAGE 106

07
1 0 4
Player’s Section
of remaining Work Points is reduced to zero the 
project is completed, and can be used in the game 
by PCs and NPCs alike.
COMPLETED PROJECTS
When a project is completed, draw a circle around 
it on the map. The effect of a completed project 
is set out in the project description – usually it 
is only a DEV bonus, but in some cases goes be-
yond this. To determine the DEV bonus, roll one 
or more D6.
DESTROYED PROJECTS
PCs and NPCs can sabotage projects, whether 
completed or not, during play. Projects can also be 
destroyed by an attack against the Ark (page 114).
A destroyed project is erased from the map. If 
the project was complete, roll as many D6 as when 
the project was completed and reduce the DEV rat-
ings accordingly. The People can undertake the 
same project again at a later time.
Scrapping a Project: The People can deliberately 
destroy an ongoing or completed project. This must 
be decided at the Assembly, and all players must 
be in agreement.
LIST OF PROJECTS
KK DEFENSES
Palisades, earthworks or even a moat. Protects the 
Ark against enemies on the outside, and makes it 
harder to slip in or out unnoticed.
DEV Requirement: None
Skills: Force or Scout
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +2D6
KK HUNTING PARTY
The People organize expeditions into the Zone to 
track and kill wild beasts for grub.
DEV Requirement: None
Skills: Endure or Shoot
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +2D6
KK CANNIBALISM
If the Ark is on the brink of starvation, the People 
can resort to desperate measures.
DEV Requirement: None
Skills: Fight or Manipulate
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +3D6, Culture −D6
Special: Increase the Session Body Count (page 
115) by D6.
KK CROPLAND
A plot of land is set aside for the organized cul-
tivation of grain, corn, turnips, radishes, or even 
mushrooms. Simple tools like plows and harrows 
are made and utilized.
DEV Requirement: None
Skills: Endure or Know the Zone
Work Points: 3 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +3D6
KK SLAVE MARKET
The Bosses of the Ark start trading in slaves, taken 
from the People or other groups in the Zone. They 
trade with each o

--- PAGE 107

07
1 0 5
The Ark
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +D6, Warfare +D6
KK PIGSTY
Pigs and other farm animals from the Old Age 
roam free after the Apocalypse and have turned 
into wild and often heavily mutated creatures. Yet, 
they can be caught and brought into the service 
of the People.
DEV Requirement: None
Skills: Endure or Know the Zone
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +2D6
KK TEMPLE
A shrine where the People can worship the Ancients 
in the Sky, the Firstborn Mutant or why not even 
the Rot itself.
DEV Requirement: None
Skills: Endure or Manipulate
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK ZONE WRESTLING
A metal cage where the strongest mutants fight 
each other for bullets and glory. Less physically 
inclined mutants bet on the outcome. No weapons 
are allowed in the cage, but mutations are consid-
ered fair play.
DEV Requirement: None
Skills: Fight or Manipulate
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +D6
KK ZONE EXPEDITION
An expedition into the Zone is a special type of 
project, described in detail in Chapter 8. It requires 
no Work Points and can be undertaken several times 
over. Only one Zone Expedition can be launched 
per Assembly. The PCs can decide whether to join 
the expedition or not.
DEV Requirement: None
Skills: None
Work Points: None
DEV Bonus: Variable
KK MUSEUM
An exhibition of objects from the Old Age. The Peo-
ple can come here to learn about the ancient world.
DEV Requirement: Culture 5
Skills: Comprehend



--- PAGE 108

07
1 0 6
Player’s Section
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6, Technology +D6
KK STATUE
A grand effigy of the Elder or a Boss with an in-
flated ego.
DEV Requirement: Culture 5
Skills: Endure or Sense Emotion
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK SUNDIAL
A device consisting of a stick placed on a flat disc of 
some kind, letting the People tell time by watching 
the shadow of the stick move.
DEV Requirement: Culture 5.
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK WATCHTOWER
Up here, you can spot enemies from afar.
DEV Requirement: Technology 5
Skills: Endure or Scout
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +D6
KK HARBOR
A simple quay that makes is easier to load and un-
load from boats and ships.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
Other Requirement: The Ark must be close to 
water.
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: —
Special: This project is a requirement for a build-
ing a Ship (below).
KK MILL
A simple mechanism that will grind plants into 
flour for baking bread. Is powered by hand, a Water 
Wheel or a Windmill.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
Other Requirement: Cropland
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +2D6
KK SMOKEHOUSE
A small house or shed where meat or fish caught in 
the Zone is cured by smoke, making it last much 
longer.
Ex AMPLE  ARK : S CR AP  FO RTRESS



--- PAGE 109

07
1 0 7
The Ark
DEV Requirement: Food Supply 5, Technology 10
Other Requirement: Hunting Party
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply + D6
KK MARKETPLACE
Bartering has always taken place in the Ark, but with 
a designated marketplace, trade is more organized.
DEV Requirement: Food Supply 10, Culture 10
Skills: Manipulate
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +D6, Culture +D6
KK MILITA
An armed force given the job to protect the Ark 
against external enemies and maintain order 
internally.
DEV Requirement: Warfare 10
Skills: Fight or Manipulate
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +2D6
KK LIBRARY
A collection of books, magazines and newspapers 
from the Old Age.
DEV Requirement: Culture 10
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 3 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +3D6
KK STABLES
Bitterbeasts (page 178) and other animals in the 
Zone can be caught to be used as mounts by the 
People – but they need to be tamed and trained first.
DEV Requirement: Food Supply 10
Skills: Endure or Know the Zone
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +D6, Warfare +D6
Special: With completed Stables the People can 
trade and use mounts for riding.
KK TAVERN
A place where the People can gather to eat, drink 
and swap stories.
DEV Requirement: Food Supply 10
Skills: Endure or Sense Emotion
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK THEATER
A stage and ensemble, entertaining the People with 
stage plays about life in the Ark or the fall of the 
Ancients.
DEV Requirement: Culture 10
Skills: Manipulate
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +2D6
KK TORTURE CHAMBER
In this confined area, suspected evildoers and trai-
tors in the Ark can be tormented until they divulge 
everything they know – and more.
DEV Requirement: Warfare 10, Culture 10
Skills: Fight or Manipulate
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +D6
KK TRIBUNAL
A court given the power to mete out punishment 
on mutants who steal, murder or disrupt the order 
ABOUT THE BARREN PEOPLE
“Our days are numbered. The People are 
doomed to wither and die. We’re not like 
the wild mutts or the Zone-Ghouls that 
seem to mul

--- PAGE 110

07
1 0 8
Player’s Section
of things. Corporal punishment is the norm, as the 
Ark can hardly afford to keep people locked up for 
very long. Hard labor or even exile are also possible 
penalties.
DEV Requirement: Warfare 10, Culture 10
Skills: Fight or Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6, Warfare +D6
KK WATER WHEEL
A large wheel built from wood or scrap metal and 
plastic, fitted with a number of blades or buckets.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
Special: Placed in a creek or waterfall, the Water 
Wheel can power a Mill or a Generator.
KK WORKSHOP
This is the place to go if you need your broken gear 
fixed – but it will cost you bullets to get anything 
done.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 3 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +2D6
Special: The Workshop is a requirement for sev-
eral other projects.
KK SURVEILLANCE
A system of informers, where the People spy on 
each other and report suspicious activity to one or 
several Bosses.
DEV Requirement: Warfare 10, Culture 10
Skills: Sneak or Manipulate
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +D6
KK CALENDAR
Using a few simple astronomical observations 
(when the Zone smog lifts enough to let the Peo-
ple see the stars), the People manage to recreate a 
yearly calendar of 365 days.
DEV Requirement: Technology 15, Culture 10
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK WINDMILL
A large fan-like structure placed on a tower of some 
sort, ingeniously built to always turn into the wind.
DEV Requirement:  Technology 15, Food Supply 10
Other Requirement: Workshop
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
Special:  The Windmill can power a Mill or a Gen-
erator – but only when the wind is blowing.
KK INK & PAPER
The People have discovered a method of turning 
tattered paper from the Old Age, or plants growing 
in the Zone, to paper – and can create simple inks 
to write with.
DEV Requirement: Technology 15, Culture 10
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture 

--- PAGE 111

07
1 0 9
The Ark
KK ARMY
An Army is more powerful than a Militia, and can 
be used for actual military campaigns in the Zone.
DEV Requirement: Warfare 20
Skills: Fight or Manipulate
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +2D6
KK BANK
A place where the People can deposit their valu-
ables and be reasonably sure they are kept safe.
DEV Requirement: Warfare 10, Culture 20
Skills: Comprehend or Manipulate
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK SHIP
A ship built of scrap, bigger than anything a single 
Gearhead could construct on his own. It could be 
steam-powered if the People have completed the 
Steam Engine project (page 111). If not, it is fitted 
with sails or oars.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
Other Requirement: Harbor
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 3 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +D6, Culture +D6, War-
fare +D6
Special: The Ship can carry about 50 passengers 
and can used to explore coastal sectors of the 
Zone. The time required is halved compared 
to exploring on foot (page 122). The ship can 
also be used to escape from threats at sea, 
and gives Gear Bonus +1 in such situations. 
Armor: 3. Resilience: 20.
KK GENERATOR
A machine built of wires and magnets, capable of 
generating an electrical current.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
Other Requirements: Workshop. Also requires a 
Steam Engine, a functional vehicle from the 
Old Age, or mutants on a treadmill. 
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +2D6
KK HELIOGRAPH
A device capable of quickly sending short messages 
over long distances, using light signals and mirrors. 
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
Other Requirements: Workshop – and the Peo-
ple must have made contact with another 
settlement, or established one of their own 
(below). 
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK SCHOOL
Here the People can learn about the Old Age, and 
all about what you have discovered about the 
dawnworld.
DEV Requirement: Culture 20
Skills: Comprehend or Know the Zone
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6, Technology +D6
KK SHELTER
Hidden tunnels and escape routes dug underneath

--- PAGE 112

07
1 1 0
Player’s Section
KK PRINTING PRESS
With this heavy piece of machinery the People can 
print simple pamphlets, papers and books.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20, Culture 20
Other Requirement: Workshop, Ink & Paper 
(above)
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Culture +2D6
KK SETTLEMENT
The People find a new spot to live and establish a 
new settlement in a different sector. When the set-
tlement is complete, decide how many of the Ark’s 
inhabitants move there.
DEV Requirement: Warfare 20, Culture 20
Other Requirements: The new settlement must 
be located in a sector explored by the PCs or 
a Zone Expedition (Chapter 8), and at least 
2D6 sectors away from the Ark.
Skills: Endure
Work Points: 3 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: —
Special:  The new settlement will have its own DEV 
ratings, and will start at zero in all of them. 
New projects are undertaken in the new settle-
ment, separately from the Ark. Some projects, 
such as the Road, Heliograph and Railroad, 
connect two settlements. They give their DEV 
bonus to both settlements when completed.
KK ROAD
Transforms one of the paths in the Zone into a road, 
which can be used by carriages or motor-driven ve-
hicles. This project can be undertaken many times 
over – every sector to be traversed by a Road counts 
as a separate project.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs per sector
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +D6, Culture +D6 – but 
only when the Road reaches another settle-
ment in the Zone. The DEV bonuses are for 
the entire Road, not for every sector.



--- PAGE 113

07
1 1 1
The Ark
Special: Traveling through a sector on a Road 
(page 122) takes half the time.
KK FOUNDRY
In this steaming furnace the People can melt metal 
scrap from the Old Age, and mold it into new items.
DEV Requirement: Technology 25
Other Requirement: Workshop
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 3 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: —
Special: The Foundry is a requirement for several 
advanced projects.
KK EXPLOSIVES LAB
A specialized workshop used to produce gunpowder 
and other explosive substances.
DEV Requirement: Technology 30, Warfare 10
Other Requirement: Distillery
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 1 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +D6
Special: Combined with the Foundry, the Explo-
sives Lab can be used to manufacture bullets. 
Bullets are then bartered in the Ark at half 
the normal cost.
KK AUTOCRACY
One Boss becomes the sole ruler of the Ark. His 
word is law.
DEV Requirement: Warfare 30
Other Requirement: Cannot be combined with 
Suffrage.
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +2D6
KK FREE ENTERPRISE
The People establish a system where every mutant 
is free to seek his own fortune. Slavery is outlawed.
DEV Requirement: Technology 30
Other Requirement: Cannot be combined with 
Collectivism, Autocracy or a Slave Market.
Skills: Manipulate
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +2D6
KK COLLECTIVISM
All private ownership is outlawed. All mutants must 
work for the common good, and all resources are 
distributed equally.
DEV Requirement: Food Supply 30
Other Requirement: Cannot be combined with 
Free Enterprise.
Skills: Manipulate
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +2D6
KK SUFFRAGE
All mutants of the People get the right to vote about 
issues that are important to the Ark.
DEV Requirement: Culture 30
Other Requirement: Cannot be combined with 
Autocracy.
Skills: Manipulate
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +2D6
KK STEAM ENGINE
A marvelous machine that runs on firewood and 
water.
DEV Requirement: Technology 30
Other Requirement: Foundry, Distillery
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +2D6
Special: Can power a Generator, 

--- PAGE 114

07
1 1 2
Player’s Section
KK RAILROAD
To build a rail link through the Zone is an advanced 
and very demanding project. Every sector to be tra-
versed by railroad counts as its own project.
DEV Requirement: Technology 35
Other Requirement: Foundry
Skills: Endure or Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: —
Special: Makes it possible to build a Train (below).
KK TRAIN
When steam trains start to roll across the Zone, a 
great step toward rebuilding the Ancients’ civiliza-
tion has been taken.
DEV Requirement: Technology 30
Other Requirements: Steam Engine, Railroad
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 3 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Food Supply +D6, Culture +D6, Tech-
nology +D6 – but only when the Train runs 
on a rail track that reaches another settlement 
in the Zone. The DEV bonuses are for the 
entire railway, not for every sector.
Special: A Train can carry around 50 passengers 
and will cross a sector in the Zone in mere 
minutes – as long as nothing blocks the 
tracks. The Train can also be used to escape 
from threats or to ram enemies. Gear Bo-
nus: +1. Armor: 3. Resilience: 15.
KK ARSENAL
In this specialized workshop, the People can mass-
produce breech-loaded firearms. An Arsenal is often 
combined with an Explosives Lab (above).
DEV Requirement: Technology 35, Warfare 10
Other Requirement: Foundry
Skills: Shoot or Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Warfare +2D6
Special: Breech-loaded firearms become available 
in the Ark.
KK SURGERY
The bonesaws of the Ark have learned the anatomy 
of the mutant body, as well as the use of ether or 
other forms of anesthesia, and can perform simple 
surgical operations.
DEV Requirement: Technology 35



--- PAGE 115

07
1 1 3
The Ark
Other Requirement: Distillery
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: None
Special: Any rolls to Heal a critical injury at the 
surgical clinic get a +2 modification. The Ses-
sion Body Count (below) is reduced by one.
KK ELECTRIC LIGHTS
Illuminates the Ark like in the Old Age, and turns 
it into a beacon seen for miles at night.
DEV Requirement: Technology 40
Other Requirements: Workshop, Generator
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +2D6
RADIO
A very basic device capable of radio communication, 
using a crystal of some sort to rectify the current.
DEV Requirement: Technology 50
Other Requirements: Workshop, Generator
Skills: Comprehend
Work Points: 2 × number of PCs
DEV Bonus: Technology +2D6
E X A M P L E
In their first Assembly, Joanna and her fellow play-
ers decide to start growing a Cropland close to the 
Ark. There are four PCs in the group, which means 
the project will require a total of 12 (3 × 4) Work 
Points. During the first session, all PCs work on the 
new Cropland and they roll a total of five /. At the 
start of the next session, 7 Work Points remain. Dur-
ing this session, the PCs put in some more work and 
roll three /. 4 Work Points now remain until the 
Cropland can be used to feed the People.
THE DAWN VAULT
The Elder no longer controls the Ark, the old man’s 
word is no longer law. But one of his command-
ments is still held in high regard by the People: To 
collect artifacts from the Old Age, study them and 
learn from them. Keep them in a safe place. The 
Elder called this place the Dawn Vault.
When you grew up, it was strictly forbidden to 
keep artifacts that you found for yourselves. Eve-
rything had to be turned over to the Dawn Vault, 
studied and filed. In theory, that is still the rule. 
But as hunger sets in and the old order falls apart, 
mutants increasingly keep artifacts for themselves 
or even barter them for grub.
Still, the Dawn Vault remains, and is guarded 
by a group of loyal Chroniclers who refuse to aban-
don the Elder’s principles. Following his will, they 
continue to collect artifacts, study them and teach 
what they learn to anyone willing 

--- PAGE 116

07
1 1 4
Player’s Section
ARTIFACTS
You can find artifacts during treks through the Zone 
– read more about that in Chapter 8. Apart from their 
primary use, artifacts have two numeric values: DEV 
Requirement and DEV Bonus, just like projects in 
the Ark. All artifacts are described on the Artifact 
Cards and in Chapter 14 of this book.
The DEV Requirement  is the minimum level 
in one of the four DEVs that the Ark must have 
reached for all of the People to be able to easily 
understand and use the artifact. This is explained 
further in Chapter 8. The DEV Bonus is added to 
the Ark DEV rating indicated – but only if the item 
is handed in to the Dawn Vault.
All this means that if you find an artifact, you 
must choose between using it for yourself and 
handing it in, to the benefit of all of the People.
E X A M P L E
When Naphta found her automatic rifle she had 
to roll to Comprehend to be able to use it, since 
the Ark’s Technology DEV was below 20. Had the 
Technology DEV been 20 or more, she would have 
automatically understood how the weapon works. If 
Naphta turns her gun over to the Dawn Vault, the 
Ark’s DEV ratings in Warfare and Technology each 
increase by D6.
ATTACKS AGAINST THE ARK
You all know there are threats out there. Someday, 
sooner or later, enemies will come to your gates to 
try to kill you, to eradicate the People. It is only a 
question of time. When the time comes, you need 
to be ready to fight.
When an enemy attacks the Ark in large num-
bers, one of your players roll dice against the GM 
to see how the battle unfolds. The roll will not de-
cide the final outcome – that’s up to your PCs – but 
only how the battle starts off, which side gets the 
upper hand.
The strength of each force is measured by its 
Battle Level. The Battle Level of the Ark is equal 
to one-tenth of the Warfare DEV rating, always 
rounded up. If the Ark is alert and combat-ready, 
its Battle Level is increased by one. The attackers’ 
Battle Level is up to the GM – from 1 for a small 
band of ill-equipped fighters to 5 or even more for 
a large, heavily armed army.
RESOLUTION
When the battle starts, each side rolls a number 
of Base Dice equal to its Battle Lev

--- PAGE 117

07
1 1 5
The Ark
step per day – unless destroyed projects have de-
creased the Ark’s Warfare DEV enough to cause a 
permanent decrease in Battle Level.
The enemy’s Battle Level is recovered at the 
same speed – but only once they are back in their 
home territory.
E X A M P L E
A large force of Zone-Ghouls attack the Ark in the 
dead of night. The Ark has a Warfare DEV of 13, 
giving it Battle Level 2. The attackers are many and 
have Battle Level 3. The players roll two Base Dice, 
the GM three. The players roll no / or =. The GM 
rolls one / but also a = – the Zone-Ghouls advance, 
but take losses as they go. Both the players and the 
GM want to push their rolls. Now the players roll 
two =! The GM rerolls one die, it comes up neither 
/ nor =. The People counterattack and get the up-
per hand. The GM wants to push again, while the 
players (obviously) are happy with their two /. The 
GM rolls again – and gets a =! The Zone-Ghouls are 
beaten. The Ark wins the battle with a +1 difference, 
indicating that the defenses held up well. The Ark 
only lost D6 inhabitants in the battle.
SESSION BODY COUNT
Life in the Ark is hard. Violence, hunger and the 
Rot claims victims almost every day. At the end of 
every gaming session, one of the players – which 
one is up to you – rolls one D6. The result tells you 
how many inhabitants of the Ark that have died in 
the meantime, beyond any PCs or NPCs who might 
have lost their lives “on screen” during actual play.
The GM is responsible for keeping track of the 
Ark’s current population figure. She should always 
note it down on the Ark Sheet. The figure will stead-
ily decrease during the course of a campaign. Un-
less you find some solution – that outsiders move 
into the Ark or that you somehow find a way to 
bring children into the world – the People are 
doomed. It’s only a matter of time.
Modified Body Count:  The session body count can 
be decreased when the Ark’s Food Supply DEV rat-
ing increases (page 100). On the other hand, the 
Ark can lose additional inhabitants during a large-
scale attack (above).
b attle re S ul t S
−2 or 
lower
Enemies flood into the Ark and destroy everything in their path. The People a

--- PAGE 118





--- PAGE 119

08
1 1 7
Zone travel
08
Zone Travel
The Zone, the wasteland surrounding the Ark, is a 
labyrinth of decaying ruins and dark forests. It’s a 
vast mass grave, full of crumbling monuments to 
the Ancients’ hubris and arrogance. Out there, feral 
savages and mutated monsters roam. And if you’re 
lucky enough to survive the beasts, the invisible, 
lethal Rot will sooner or later kill you.
For as long as you can remember, the Elder has 
warned you not to stray into the Zone. Yet, that’s 
exactly where you need to go now, deep into the 
unknown. To find knowledge. To find clues to the 
origin of the People – and a path to your future.
THE ZONE MAP
The first thing you do, before starting your cam-
paign, is to define your Zone. Create your own Zone 
– based on your own home town or any suitable 
metropolitan area – or use one of the two premade 
Zones described in this chapter, with maps on the 
inside covers of this book.
The Zone map is a central component of the 
game. At the start of the game, most of the Zone 
map is empty. During the course of play, you will 
fill it with content. You can make notes directly on 
the map itself, or use a Zone Log , which you can 
find at the back of this book or download from the 
Modiphius website. There, you will also find a tem-
plate that you can use to draw your own Zone maps.
SECTORS
The Zone map has a grid overlay. Every square in 
the grid is called a sector. A sector is roughly one 
square mile in size. The map, as well as the sectors, 
is not only a tool for players – both are used by the 
People too. Stalkers have divided the map into sec-
tors to help exploration, and they draw new things 
on the map as they explore the Zone further.
EXAMPLE ZONE 1:  
THE BIG SMOKE
Outside, it’s a jungle, the old pictures show what it 
was like, but not anymore. Now it’s choked by the 
growth, and the mist … the mist that gets every-
where, always probing, driftin’...
The few of us who’ve been out there have got 
some stories alright. The roads full of machines, bro-
ken and smashed, the crumbling piles teetering on 
edge, one whiff and they’ll fall like the others. Then 
there’s the big ol’ places in the center of town. Mas-
sive wit

--- PAGE 120

08
1 1 8
Player’s Section
around it and great pickings inside if you can make 
the jumps between the broken stepping stones of 
buildings to get there, and survive to tell. No one 
goes east anymore though. 
Out West there’s streets where somethin’ pushed 
everything back, rubble and machines. Like they was 
looking to fix the streets but got nowhere. Maybe 
they got lost in the mist like people do. There’s a 
big place looks like it was used for fighting by the 
Serpent Lake. Roof’s all broken, just banks of rotten 
seats around a pool. They say the water is blood red 
and there’s blades and stuff under the water. 
North there’s a palace on the hill, an overgrown 
tower they say and a vast glass house full of light, 
can’t believe everything you hear but apparently a 
princess lives in the tower called Alexandra. I always 
dreamed I’d meet her one day. Still, sometimes there’s 
is a glow in that direction at night so maybe I will.
South there’s the big eye, creepy overgrown 
thing, but there’s often a glow in the middle that 
makes it look like a big eye, people say it’s just the 
sunset shining through the middle but I dunno … 
now and then the whole thing creeks, sounds like 
wires stretching, or something big settling. Like it’s 
breathing!
Not many of us been south though, there’s only 
a couple of ways across the river and seriously, you 
don’t wanna fall into that dark mess! Since the other 
bridges collapsed you’ve got the ‘Minster but for 
half the span there’s just a crumbling rubble arch, 
good enough for single file but you can feel it wob-
bling, I don’t figure it will be there next year. 
If you follow the river East, before it gets too hard 
to see in the mist, there’s a big castle and a bridge 
with two towers. Some ol’ raven still squawks at the 
top of the castle so apparently we’re still safe though 
dunno what a stupid bird has to do with anything. 
The castle is like out of a fairy tale, it’s surrounded 
by water, and there’s no way across unless you want 
to risk the river – like I said, don’t fall in! The only 



--- PAGE 121

08
1 1 9
Zone travel
way across the river to the south around here is the 
bridge with two towers. You gotta get up one of the 
towers and over those walkways at the top as the 
bridge itself got smashed up. Real dark up there so 
be careful, never know what’s waiting for you. 
I can still see ol’ Ben, he’s leaning bad almost as 
if he’ll topple over, kind of looks wrong but he’s still 
there every morning, still says 6 o’clock. Sometimes 
I swear I hear something from the top, like a muffled 
bell. Can’t be though can it?
Be careful around the Square (most the roads 
are blocked with rubble there so you’ll be lucky to 
make it that far anyways), the statue that was on the 
top of the big column is smashed on the ground. 
Now something else is on the top of the column but 
the mist is so thick around there you can’t make 
it out. Dunno if I ever wanna find out though, just 
amazed it’s still standing.
Another thing on the river – the old ship, with 
big guns, half sunk but sometimes there’s lights 
up top, a few people headed over ‘Minster to get a 
closer look but never came back. 
Lastly be careful of the tunnels, they’re mostly 
flooded, just a lot of bad stuff down there, they say 
there’s lot of ways to get around under the city 
quick, come up in all kinds of cool places but well 
the people usually saying that stuff ain’t the ones 
who been so just be careful right?
NOTES ON THE MAP
On the premade Zone maps there are al-
ready some notes – markings denoting 
ruins, warnings of Rot-infested areas and 
monsters, even wild guesses about the 
location of Eden. Take these notes with a 
big pinch of salt – all they reflect is what 
Stalkers think is out there, and they may 
very well be wildly inaccurate!



--- PAGE 122

08
1 2 0
Player’s Section
EXAMPLE ZONE 2:  
THE DEAD APPLE
This used to be a great city, yeah? Once upon a 
time. Now it’s all ruins running with kudzu like 
great hands trying to pull what’s left of the build-
ings down. But they ain’t pulled all the buildings 
down yet. This city still has some fight in her. They 
called it the New City, leastways that’s what I heard. 
Who knows. So long ago now, yeah? In the mid-
dle of it all is a place we call The Zone Swamps. I 
been told this place used to be where people went 
running and ate outside. Neither sounds safe in 
a swamp, but maybe people back then were crazy. 
They did blow up the world after all. There’s rumors 
that say a cult lives somewhere inside, yeah? But 
who’s going to go and see? I’m crazy, but I’m not 
stupid. Gators out there twelve feet long if they’re 
a foot. No lie. I know a fella that hunts them. Well… 
he used to. Don’t nobody know him anymore.
Among the big old buildings hulking against 
the night is Death Tower. This building must once 
have dwarfed everything around it. Biggest thing I 
seen in my life. No lie. Its upper floors are collapsed 
and the great beast is spilling moss like she’s crying, 
yeah. It’s home to a gang you don’t want to tussle 
with. They’re called The Death Tower Boys and, 
after they kill you, they’ll eat your brain to absorb 
your power. They ain’t the smartest people in the 
city, so I don’t think it works for them.
Getting out of the city across all that water, 
you use the Bridge, see? But the people there have 
themselves a toll. There’s some that say ancient ma-
chines used to carry people across the Bridge, but 
you know how people talk. Anyway, it’s one of the 
few structures that, praise to the Gods, remained 
largely intact. The Bridge is a thriving community 
of folk living that civilized way of life so many of us 
done forgot. They grow their own food and barter 
with the outside. Don’t go thinking you’re gonna 



--- PAGE 123

08
1 2 1
Zone travel
steal from them though. Bridgers have a defen-
sive militia. I mean, look at it, it’s a bridge, yeah? 
There’s only two ways on. That’s pretty easy to de-
fend. Many a group has tried, and failed, to take 
the bounty the Bridgers have made for themselves. 
Bridgers take care of each other.
Out there in the water is the F allen Lady. She’s 
got all these spikes on her head. No one can tell you 
for sure why. Today, she lies partly in a great bay, but 
some bits of her can be reached. You can go inside 
if the people who live there let you. Call themselves 
Lighthouse Keepers, though I ain’t never seen a light-
house. They’re a crazy bunch. Don’t argue too much 
with them, yeah? At night, The Lady’s torch is lit 
by large fires to warn oncoming ships that they are 
about to enter an area where ruined buildings could 
rip their hulls and sink them like stones. There’s sal-
vagers that’ll hope that very thing happens.
The ancients buried their dead beneath large 
stones on which they wrote their names. Few of 
those names are readable now, and fewer still want 
to venture out to the place where they buried them. 
I done it though, ‘cause I guide people when things 
get tight. People whisper that the dead here don’t 
all rest, but I never seen anything like that. Then 
again, I only went once. I ain’t no fool. They call this 
place The Deadlands. I know enough to respect a 
name like that, yeah?
Not for nothing, but Walled Island is the most 
fortified place in the city. Walled Island is out in 
the water, some say it always was. Pirates are there. 
Powerful ones that’ll cut your head off for a scrap of 
copper. Descended from nasty pieces of work and 
ruled by a crazy man called “Calico Jack,” this small 
city is one place you need to stay away from. No lie.
That’s the main sites. I mean most of the place 
is underwater right? Had to be one hell of city back 
when things were good, and we weren’t killing each 
other for food. Those must have been some fat days 
indeed, yeah?



--- PAGE 124

08
1 2 2
Player’s Section
ZONE TRAVEL
Trekking into the Zone is not a venture to be 
undertaken lightly. Prepare yourselves well, plan 
where you want to go and how long you will be 
gone for carefully. Bring plenty of grub, clean wa-
ter and bullets. Weapons, preferably firearms, are a 
given. If you can, have a Gearhead make you some 
Rot-suits (below). They won’t make you immune 
to the Rot, but they can help a little. If you can 
find a Rot-Eater (page 76) to bring along, that’s a 
big bonus. And finally, the most obvious advice 
of all: never walk into the Zone without a Stalker 
to lead the way.
MOVEMENT ON THE ZONE MAP
In the Zone, you move from sector to sector. You 
can move diagonally. Each time you enter a new 
sector, your Stalker can roll to Find the Path. If you 
have several Stalkers, only one of them may roll. If 
the terrain is very difficult, the GM can make you 
roll to Endure just to get into the sector.
EXPLORING A SECTOR
Each time you enter a new sector, you generally 
need to explore  it. That means the GM describes 
the general terrain and any prominent ruins or 
other landmarks. You tell her what you want to take 
a closer look at, or what you want to avoid. In a new 
sector, you can run into all kinds of threats, but also 
find priceless artifacts.
TIME & TRAVEL
A typical sector takes four hours to explore, includ-
ing any encounters. This might seem like a long 
time, but bear in mind the Zone is a twisted maze 
of overgrown ruins. You need to proceed very care-
fully. Sectors with especially difficult terrain can 
take even longer to explore, while fairly open sec-
tors can be explored in half the time. The GM has 
the final call.
The Stalker: A Stalker who Finds the Path (page 
56) can use a stunt to reduce the time it takes to 
explore a sector by half – typically from four to two 
hours. He can also rush you through a sector in a 
quarter of the time and avoid all threats, but then 
you will miss any artifacts, grub or clean water in 
the sector.
Vehicles:  If you are traveling in a vehicle (page 
94), the time it takes to explore a sector is also cut 
in half. This effect is cumulative with the Stalker’s 
stunts – meaning a mount

--- PAGE 125

08
1 2 3
Zone travel
Only one roll is allowed per sector and lookout 
post, but the Stalker is allowed to roll again when 
he actually enters the sector. The Stalker can, if 
nothing blocks the view, roll to explore all eight 
adjacent sectors.
THE ZONE FOR THE GM
How the GM handles Zone travel and creates the 
environment that the PCs explore is discussed fur-
ther in Chapter 11.
ZONE EXPEDITIONS
A Zone Expedition is something beyond just a mi-
nor journey through the Zone, it is a bigger project 
that involves the entire People. To undertake a Zone 
Expedition is therefore a decision that must be 
taken at the Assembly (page 103).
THE GOAL
When a Zone Expedition is undertaken, the As-
sembly must first agree on its goal. In game terms, 
it must always be to increase one of the four DEV 
ratings of the Ark: Grub, Culture, Technology 
or Defense. More than half of the players in the 
group must be in agreement – if not, the expedition 
doesn’t happen.
TARGET SECTOR
When the Assembly has agreed on the goal of the 
expedition, you need to decide on the target loca-
tion: choose a sector on the Zone map and what the 
People believe it contains.
To select the target sector, you must first pick 
a starting sector. The starting sector must be one 
that has been explored previously by the PCs, but 
it must also be located next to an unexplored sector. 
(If no sectors have been explored yet, the starting 
sector is simply the one where the Ark is located.) 
Then roll 2D6. The result indicates the distance, in 
sectors, between the starting sector and the target 
sector – in a straight line into unexplored Zone ter-
ritory. Decide together, in the group, exactly where 
the target sector is located.
The Ruin:  Finally, decide what kind of ruin or other 
structure the People believe is in the target sector. It 
needs to be something that can reasonably increase 
the chosen DEV rating. Some examples:
Grub:  Old supermarket, lush valley, overgrown farm.
Culture: Museum, library, movie theater.
Technology: Factory, workshop, airplane wreck.
Defense:  Military base, stockpile of explosives, 
shelter.
EXPEDITIONS WITH PCs
If PCs join a Zone Expedition, play it out using the 
n

--- PAGE 126

08
1 2 4
Player’s Section
EXPEDITIONS WITHOUT PCs
If no PC joins the expedition, it simply leaves and 
is then handled in a summary fashion. Make a note 
of what the target DEV rating and target sector of 
the expedition is. In the next session, roll a D6 on 
the table below at any convenient time:
=
One or a few survivors stagger back into the Ark. They 
are hurt, exhausted, unhinged – or all of the above. The 
GM decides what has happened to the expedition – and 
if someone or something has followed the survivors back 
to the Ark.
2
The entire expedition returns to the Ark, having failed 
to reach the target sector. Something has forced them to 
turn back – the GM decides what.
3–4
Nothing is heard from the expedition, and rumors 
spread in the Ark regarding its fate. Roll again on this 
table in the next gaming session. If you roll this result 
three times, the expedition is lost for good and never 
comes back. Its actual fate is up to the GM to decide.
5
The expedition returns, apart from D6 members who 
have been killed along the way. It didn’t reach the target 
sector, but found something else that is valuable or 
interesting. One DEV rating other than the chosen one 
(the GM decides which) is increased by 2D6.
/
The expedition returns in triumph. Its mission is accom-
plished and the chosen DEV rating is increased by 2D6. 
One D6 expedition members have been lost along the 
way.
ARTIFACTS
Artifacts – items from the Old Age that still work or 
can provide the People with useful knowledge – are 
the single most important reason to venture into 
the Zone. If you find a powerful artifact, you will be 
praised as a hero in the Ark – but also envied by many.
FINDING ARTIFACTS
You can find artifacts by searching the sectors of the 
Zone. When the GM says you have found an artifact, 
draw an Artifact Card or roll on the table on page 
189. Alternatively, the GM can decide what artifact 
you find. Unless it’s possible, story-wise, to keep your 
artifact hidden from the other PCs, you must let the 
other players know what artifact you have found.
COMPREHENDING ARTIFACTS
Every artifact has a DEV Requirement. This is the 
minimum score in one of the Ark’s four DEV r

--- PAGE 127

08
1 2 5
Zone travel
Maybe it was just Nature’s revenge on the human 
race for consuming the Earth’s natural resources 
too greedily.
For you, for the People, it makes no difference. 
All you know, all you need to know, is that the Rot 
kills. It’s out there, everywhere. It’s stronger in some 
places, weaker in others. The effects of the Rot are 
unpredictable – it can be anything from shivers and 
a fever to hair loss and vomiting blood.
ROT LEVEL
The worst thing about the Rot is that it perme-
ates your body and builds up inside you over time. 
When you are contaminated by the Rot, you suffer 
Rot Points. Mark them in the check boxes on your 
character sheet.
Every sector in the Zone has a Rot Level, from 
zero and up. When you go into a new sector in the 
Zone, you will usually not know the Rot Level in 
it – so be careful and make sure you can get out 
quickly if you need to. And when you learn the Rot 
Level, don’t forget to note it down on the Zone map 
or the Zone log.
The Rot Level determines at what frequency you 
take Rot Points:
0
Zone oasis.  The sector is as good as free from Rot. You 
suffer no Rot Points here. The Ark is located in such a 
sector.
1 w ea
k r ot
.  In these sectors you get one Rot Point every 
day.
2 Strong r ot
.  In such a sector you suffer one Rot Point 
every hour.
3 h ot
spot.  Here, you will die quickly. You get one Rot 
Point every minute.




--- PAGE 128

08
1 2 6
Player’s Section
ROT ATTACK
You can also get Rot Points from individual events 
or actions in the Zone, such as consuming contami-
nated grub or drink, wading through Rot-water or 
coming into contact with contaminated creatures. 
In these situations, you suffer one or more Rot 
Points directly. This is called a Rot attack.
Grub and Water: Eating or drinking one ration of 
contaminated grub or water will typically give you 
one Rot Point.
EFFECTS OF THE ROT
Every time you suffer a Rot Point, you must im-
mediately roll a number of Base Dice equal to your 
total amount of Rot Points. For every = you roll, you 
suffer one point of damage (trauma to Strength).
ROT SUITS
Gearheads can construct primitive Rot suits from 
bits of scrap (page 55). Typically, they provide a 
Protection Rating of 3 against the Rot – this means 
you get to roll three Gear Dice every time you suffer 
a Rot Point – if you roll one or more / (six), the suit 
absorbs the Rot Point. But for every 
  you roll, the 
Protection Rating decreases one step. The suit can 
be repaired, just like any piece of gear.
There are artifacts that can give you an even 
better protection against the Rot. The Rot-Eater 
mutation makes you immune to the effects of Rot-
related trauma – you suffer no damage from it – but 
you still accumulate Rot Points.
DECONTAMINATION
When you are back in the Ark or take refuge in 
some other Rot-free area, one Rot Point will leave 
your body every day. If you wash your body in clean 
water, half of your Rot Points (rounded up) go away 
immediately (you only get this effect from your first 
wash on returning to the Ark).
PERMANENT ROT POINTS
When you are contaminated by the Rot, there is 
a risk that it will stay in your body forever. Every 
time you are about to lose one Rot Point, roll one 
Base Die. If you roll a =, the Rot Points stays, and 
becomes permanent. Mark this on your character 
sheet.
Permanent Rot Points stay with you for the rest 
of your life, no matter how hard you scrub yourself. 
Permanent Rot Points cannot be used by the Rot-
Eater mutation.
E X A M P L E
Krin is out in the Zone. On the first day, she only 
moves in sectors with Rot Level 1. In th

--- PAGE 129

08
1 2 7
Zone travel
the GM gives her another Rot Point for spending the 
day (mainly) in Rot Level 1 sectors. She rolls four 
Base Dice and gets two =. Krin suffers two points 
of damage.
The next day, Krin returns to the Ark to be de-
contaminated, which would eliminate two of her Rot 
Points immediately. She rolls two Base Dice, and gets 
one = – one Rot Point washed away, but the other be-
comes permanent. After her 
decontamination, Krin has 
one permanent and two 
temporary Rot Points. 
As long as she stays in 
the Ark, she loses one 
temporary Rot Point per 
day – but for each one, 
she must roll to see if it 
becomes permanent.
ABOUT THE ENCLAVES
“When the world ended, not all people 
died. We are proof of that. They say some 
people fled the Apocalypse. They dug 
deep underground, dove to the bottom of 
the ocean or left the Earth to build float-
ing cities in the sky. These sanctuaries 
were called enclaves. But the Apocalypse 
didn’t let people get away that easily. 
They say a great war broke out between 
the enclaves, that the last people tried 
their hardest to annihilate each other. 
Mighty weapon-strikes crushed under-
ground enclaves and felled others from 
the sky in a rain of fire. How the war 
ended? Who knows? Maybe it’s still go-
ing on?”
– Hanneth, Chronicler



--- PAGE 130





--- PAGE 131

09
1 2 9
Your job as gamemaster
09
Your job  
as gamemaster
You are the Gamemaster. You are the Ark, you are 
the Zone, you are the Rot itself. You are the friends 
and enemies of the PCs, you are the monsters stalk-
ing them among the ruins, you are the artifacts wait-
ing to be discovered. You are the truth about the 
People, you are the journey to discover that truth. 
It’s a tough job, but also great fun. This chapter 
tells you how to do it, and the following chapters 
give you all the tools you need – on top of your 
own imagination.
Mutant: Year Zero  doesn’t require much prepa-
ration on your part. There is no preset course of 
events that you need to memorize, instead you 
and the players create your story together, us-
ing the tools of the game and your own creative 
minds.
In this chapter, you will find the basic princi-
ples of the game, as well as typical events in the 
Ark and in the Zone. There are also guidelines to 
help you run your first session of Mutant: Year 
Zero , and advice on how to create and manage 
your NPCs.
GAME PRINCIPLES
Twelve basic principles underpin this game. Their 
purpose is to help you set the right tone for the 
game, and to be there as a support when you handle 
various situations that can arise during play.
1. EVERYTHING ROTS
In the world of Mutant: Year Zero , nothing endures. 
The PCs themselves decay and mutate, their gear 
breaks, the Ark is about to tear itself apart. There 
is no safe haven. If the players start to feel safe and 
comfortable, it’s time to break something. Let the 
players build things – gear, projects, relationships – 
then threaten these things and make the PCs fight 
to keep them.
2. THERE IS NEVER ENOUGH GRUB
To survive, the PCs must go out and look for re-
sources. The game mechanics will create a constant 
need for grub and clean water, and it’s your job to 
make them fight for it. But don’t make the resources 
impossible  to get. In the Ark, there is always a Fixer 



--- PAGE 132

09
1 3 0
GAmemaster’s Section
or a Boss who can get grub – for a price. Out in the 
Zone, Stalkers can find grub, but it will probably be 
contaminated by the Rot…
3. IF YOU’VE GOT IT, YOU’RE A TARGET
If the PCs – against all odds – come across a large 
amount of grub or bullets, or if they find a power-
ful artifact, it doesn’t mean their troubles are over. 
They will draw the envy of other mutants in the 
Ark, who might try to cheat them or just plain kill 
them and take their stuff. Make the PCs fight to 
keep what they have.
4. MUTATIONS ARE THERE TO BE USED
The mutations are a central part of the game. Give 
the PCs plenty of opportunities to use them. Since 
the mutations are random and not chosen by the 
players, they may find it difficult to find uses for 
them. Help them by creating challenges tailored to 
the PCs’ specific mutations. Is a PC Reptilian? Give 
him an enemy to sneak by. Does another PC have 
Insect Wings? Show her a lookout post to fly up to.
5. EVERYTHING IS PERSONAL
In Mutant: Year Zero, the PCs are not faceless ad-
venturers killing for gold. They are individuals, with 
dreams and relationships. Sure, they may strive to-
ward a common goal and they may work for others 
in return for grub or bullets – but in the end, the 
game is about what the PCs want for themselves. 
Treat your NPCs the same way – give them names, 
give them goals, make them individuals.
6. THE PLAYERS LEAD THE WAY
Mutant: Year Zero  is about discovering the mys-
teries of the Old Age and building a new society 
among the ruins. That’s only going to be fun if the 
players are allowed to go where they want and build 
T HE  DERELICT  OI L  RI G  ( PA GE  1 47)



--- PAGE 133

09
1 3 1
Your job as gamemaster
what they want. That doesn’t mean you should give 
them everything they desire – on the contrary, the 
more they want it, the more you should make them 
fight for it. Your job is to challenge the PCs and give 
their actions interesting consequences.
7. THE PLAYERS HAVE THE ANSWERS
Ask the players questions about their PCs. How they 
feel, what they think, what has happened before and 
what they plan to do next. Ask follow-up questions, 
be specific. Use their answers when planning new 
challenges for the PCs.
You can even let the players decide minor 
things not related to their PCs. What does that ru-
ined building look like? Who meets them at the 
gate of the Ark? You don’t have to describe every 
detail – let the players contribute.
8. THE END IS NEVER SET
It’s fine to consider what twists and turns your cam-
paign might take beforehand. If you want to prepare 
possible encounters with NPCs or monsters, do so 
– but don’t become a slave to your plans . Never decide 
beforehand how a gaming session or a campaign 
should end. Challenge the PCs, let them face dangers 
and misery, but don’t try to control how the players 
react. Instead, let their actions have consequences, 
and create new challenges based on those conse-
quences. That’s how the game world comes alive.
9. DEATH IS A PART OF LIFE
The world of Mutant: Year Zero  is a harsh place. To 
kill PCs is not a goal in itself – but if it happens, let it. 
Don’t fudge dice or throw in some miraculous deus 
ex machina  to save a PC’s life. The players should 
feel vulnerable. Creating a new PC is a quick proc-
ess and introducing him to the group is usually easy, 
since the Ark is small and everyone knows everyone.
10. FEEL THE APOCALYPSE
Paint a vivid mental picture of the post-apocalyptic 
world for the players. Describe the blackened ruins 
and the dead forests of the Zone, make the mutants 
and the misery in the Ark come alive. Let them feel 
hunger and thirst when grub and water runs out, 
have them shiver in the atomic winter. But don’t 
get long-winded – don’t list everything the PCs see, 
hear and sense. Pick some detail – an object from 
the Old Age, a particular mutan

--- PAGE 134

09
1 3 2
GAmemaster’s Section
 K The Fixer Jonats comes running. Catching 
his breath, he pants: “The Enforcers Marl and 
Lenny are on their way here. They’re going to 
beat you up.”
 K “I swear by the Ancients – I’m not lying,” As-
trina says. “I saw a creature made of metal 
moving on the outskirts of the Ark last night.”
FIGHT OVER PROJECTS
During the Assembly (Chapter 7), the players decide 
which projects the People will undertake. Having 
NPCs try to sabotage or control the projects is usu-
ally an effective way to engage players. Examples:
 K The Boss Oscartian turns up with two Enforc-
ers in tow. He demands the construction of 
the temple to be stopped, and threatens to kill 
anyone who doesn’t obey.
 K The Generator, the machine meant to give the 
People light in the darkness of the Zone, has 
been bludgeoned into useless scrap. Someone 
has sabotaged it during the night.
 K The Boss Johammed spits a mouthful of blood 
on his rival Maximon’s mauled body. “Alright, 
you work for me now,” he says. “The palisade 
goes there.”
A THREAT ESCALATES
Each of the 25 Threat Cards describes an internal or 
external threat to the Ark. These threats usually can-
not be ignored by anyone in the Ark, nor by the PCs. 
In Chapter 10, these threats are described in more 
detail, with suggestions on how to escalate them.
You will usually draw or roll up a new threat at 
the start of each session, but you can escalate them 
whenever you want. Always try to make the threats 
personal. Let them affect the PCs, or NPCs who are 
important to them, in some concrete way.
FIGHT OVER GEAR
In Mutant: Year Zero, the PCs’ grub, bullets, weap-
ons and other gear can make the difference between 
life and death. Want to instantly increase the inten-
sity of a gaming session? Have an NPC try to steal 
a PC’s gear. It can be a stealthy theft leading to a 
frantic chase for the perpetrator, or brute robbery. 
Examples:
 K The Gearhead Quark stares at the ancient 
weapon you found in the Zone. “Can I hold it?” 
he whispers. “Just for a minute?”.
 K The baseball bat hits you square over the head 
and you fall headlong in the mud, stunned. 
“Give me your bullets,” Montiak hisses.
 K A heavy 

--- PAGE 135

09
1 3 3
Your job as gamemaster
 K “You tried to play me,” the Boss Johammed 
hisses. “20 bullets before dawn, or we’ll kill you 
and hang your corpse from the palisade.”
 K The sharp smell of smoke billowing into your 
den wakes you up. “We don’t take orders from 
you any more!” your rival Lorango shouts from 
outside. “Time to die!”
AN NPC GETS INTO TROUBLE
All PCs have enemies – but they also have people they 
care about and need to protect. The players estab-
lished who these people are when they created their 
characters (Chapter 2). If you want to create instant 
drama, pick one of these NPCs and threaten to kill 
him – or worse. This should make the player spring 
into action! And should he choose to leave his friends 
to a horrible fate, he will soon realize he will be very 
alone when he is in trouble himself. Examples:
 K Jony breaks down in front of you. “What am I 
going to do?” he sobs. “If I don’t pay Marlotte 
before dawn, I’m dead.”
 K Astrina is nowhere to be found. No one has 
seen her since yesterday night. Apparently, 
she was talking about going into the Zone.
 K The rumor spreads like wildfire in the Ark. The 
Boss Johammed is about to get lynched. Who 
will get you grub if he dies?
PC vs PC
The PCs may be friends, but in the world of Mutant, 
all friendship is tested – sooner or later. The most ef-
fective way to make PCs turn on each other is to use 
an NPC that both PCs have some relationship to. 
Other methods include spreading rumors in the Ark, 
or giving something to a PC that you know another 
PC really wants. But be careful – you don’t want a 
conflict between PCs to become a conflict between 
players. Be sure to know your gaming group well 
before you use this type of event. Examples:
 K Astrina hesitates before she speaks. “I know 
you enjoy spending time with Hugust. But there 
is something I need to tell you about him.”
 K “Come on in,” Marlotte says. “I have grub, 
booze and a warm cabin. But not for your 
friend there. He stays outside.”
 K Franton lazily swings his bat through the air. 
“Step aside. I have no fight with you. I only 
want Silas.”
UNWANTED CONSEQUENCES
The Ark is a small and fragile society. Everything 
the P

--- PAGE 136

09
1 3 4
GAmemaster’s Section
EVENTS IN THE ZONE
Out in the Zone, the game takes on a different char-
acter from in the Ark. Instead of projects, power 
struggles and intrigue, the PCs are generally alone 
and exposed to the nightmares hunting among the 
ruins. In the Zone, cooperation tends to be the norm. 
Some of the typical events in the Zone are similar 
to the ones in the Ark, but others are completely 
different.
To play these events out, you’ll generally want 
to use one of the specific groups, monsters and 
phenomena described in Chapter 13.
A BEACON IN THE DISTANCE
The Zone is full of threats and dangers, but also 
of opportunities. Give the PCs something to strive 
for, to journey toward. It can be a mysterious light 
in the distance, a building that seems strangely in-
tact, a gate to an ancient shelter, a group of strange 
people in the distance, or something else. For in-
spiration, have a look in Chapter 12 and Chapter 
13. Examples:
 K When darkness falls, you see that the Zone 
tower ahead of you is illuminated. Across the 
facade of the huge building, you see several 
pools of light.
 K In the room beyond, you spot what looks like 
machinery from the Old Age. You can’t see 
exactly what it is without going closer.
 K “I swear,” the water trader says. “One day’s 
walk that way, there is a huge metal gate in 
the cliffside. It seems to be intact.”
DANGER AHEAD
Just like in the Ark, you can create dramatic ten-
sion in the Zone by describing a looming threat, 
something unnerving at the horizon. It’s most 
effective if you have just used the Beacon in the 
Distance event above, enticing the PCs to keep go-
ing forward. The new threat creates an interesting 
dilemma. Examples:
 K When you get closer to the old warehouse you 
see a flickering light, as if from a fire, inside 
the ruined old building. Someone is there.
Z ONE - GHOULS  ( PA GE  1 76)



--- PAGE 137

09
1 3 5
Your job as gamemaster
 K At the horizon, you see a black wall forming. 
“Dust storm,” the Stalker Yassan hisses. “We 
have to seek cover.”
 K Krin nervously scouts the surroundings. “It’s 
getting dark, soon this place will be crawling 
with Zone-Ghouls. I know your friend is out 
there, but it’s too dangerous to keep searching 
for him.”
A HARD CHOICE
Present a difficult dilemma to the players. It can be 
the result of the two events listed above, Beacon in 
the Distance and Danger Ahead – when they have 
some enticing goal ahead of them, place a danger-
ous threat or obstacle in their way. Will they press 
on or turn back? You can also show them two differ-
ent things to strive for, and make them choose one 
of them – or split up. Or offer them two separate 
paths to the same goal, and let them choose which 
one to take. Few things engage players as much as 
a meaningful choice. Examples:
 K You start to climb over the remains of the 
bridge, but realize the support-beams are 
badly corroded by time. Your other option is to 
wade through the water, but it could be con-
taminated by the Rot. What do you do?
 K The leeches fall from the ceiling and land 
around you with heavy thuds. In the room 
beyond them you see several, seemingly intact, 
artifacts from the Old Age. What do you do?
 K Krin reaches her hands toward you through 
the narrow basement window. “Give me the 
child! It won’t survive the acid rain!” Do you 
hand the child over to her?”
GEAR IS LOST
Out in the Zone, the PCs’ gear – weapons, grub, bul-
lets and artifacts – can be the difference between 
life and death. If you really want to make your play-
ers sweat – take their stuff. But always give them 
a chance of getting it back some way. Examples:
 K You heave yourself up onto the rusted support 
beam, out of reach for the Zone-Ghouls. But in 
the climb you drop your scrap rifle. Helpless, 
you watch it fall to the ground far below.
 K You struggle your way across the canal, but 
your clothes and your gear are soaking wet. 
All of your grub is drenched in Rot-water.
 K When you wake up, Yassan is gone. It seems he 
has taken all the grub you had.
SLEEPLESS NIGHT
To keep their Wits int

--- PAGE 138

09
1 3 6
GAmemaster’s Section
 K The Zone-Ghoul’s iron bar hits Franton square 
across the eyebrow, and he drops like a log. 
The rest of you see him being dragged away. 
What do you do?
AN NPC GETS INTO TROUBLE
Try to always bring at least one NPC on every jour-
ney into the Zone – preferably an NPC that one or 
more PCs have a relationship to. These NPCs are 
perfect tools for creating drama in the Zone – place 
the NPC in lethal danger and the PCs react. Will 
they leave him to his fate? It is even more interest-
ing if the PCs have different relationships to the 
NPC, which can mean some may want to save him 
while others would rather see him gone…
 K Suddenly, heavy black lumps fall from the ceil-
ing and hit Silas. He screams for help as the 
leeches bite into his flesh and start drinking 
his blood. What do you do?
 K When you get there, Astrina is lying lifeless on 
the ground. Some feral mutants stand crouched 
over her, poking her with their scrap spears.
 K The air is moldy and the ground covered by 
mud. Danko, leading the way, screams for help 
as his feet and legs are suddenly being pulled 
down by the quicksand.
PC vs PC
A Zone trek is always challenging and can make 
the PCs show what they’re made of. Bonds of friend-
ship can be strained to the point of breaking – and 
beyond. Have a PC find an artifact that another PC 
would have more use for. Lure one PC in one direc-
tion, and the rest in another. Have a PC’s grub or 
artifact go missing and insinuate that an NPC that 
another PC has a relationship to is guilty of the 
theft. These kinds of events should be used with 
great care. Examples:
 K Franton would probably make better use of 
the ancient weapon than you are able to. But 
you’re the one who found it, right? Do you keep 
it, or do you give it to him?
 K Ok, are you sure you want to ignore the old 
tower and keep going? Delta, you’re the Gear-
head – what do you think?
 K Hugust, you need grub to heal your injuries. Will 
the rest of you give him what he needs? What if 
there won’t be enough for the trip home?
THE ZONE vs EVERYONE
The Zone can divide, but it can also unite. Every 
now and then, present the PCs with an obstacle 
that th

--- PAGE 139

09
1 3 7
Your job as gamemaster
 K A sharp ozonic smell fills the air and you spot 
large, semi-transparent bubbles drifting to-
ward you. Thin antennae protrude from their 
strange, spherical bodies. What do you do?
AN UNEXPECTED ENCOUNTER
In the wasteland that is the Zone, there are many 
enemies and threats. But if the PCs are lucky, they 
might also run into people who are friendly – or at 
least ready to negotiate. Read more about factions 
in the Zone in Chapter 13.
Let encounters with other factions be tense 
meetings. Keep the players guessing. Let the PCs 
meet a group of friendly mutants – who turn out 
to be blood-thirsty cannibals. Or let the PCs meet 
some wild Zone-Ghouls – who seek to bargain, not 
to kill. Examples:
 K The mutant strangers lay down their weapons. 
“Come with us,” their leader says. “Come to our 
settlement. We have enough grub for everyone 
there.”
 K One of the Zone-Ghouls stops the others. Slowly, 
he puts his scrap spear on the ground and 
holds his hands up to show he’s not armed.
 K A mutant sits on a wrecked car, dressed in a 
pieces of junk and scrap. He salutes you all by 
name, and tells you he’s been waiting for you 
to give you a message from your future.
FIRST SESSION
Your first session as GM for Mutant: Year Zero can 
feel a little intimidating. You have no script to follow, 
no pre-prepared story to lead the players through. 
Don’t worry! The game mechanics – in the form of 
Ark projects, Threat Cards, and the events above – 
will give the players plenty to sink their teeth into. 
Here are some thoughts and advice you might want 
to take a look at before your first session:
Don’t Make a Grand Plan.  Do not, prior to play, 
think up a grandiose story for the PCs to follow. 
The plot will grow organically, during play. Keep 
an open mind and play to find out what happens.
Make the Most of PC Generation. Be active and 
engaged when the players generate their characters. 
During the process, they establish their relation-
ships to each other and to key NPCs. Take note of 
all of these NPCs and use them during play.
Begin with a Project and a Threat. The game will 
typically begin in the Ark. Before the actual role-
pla

--- PAGE 140

09
1 3 8
GAmemaster’s Section
Then, you draw a Threat Card (or roll up a threat, 
see Chapter 10). The project and the threat are your 
basis for the first session of play. Start play with a 
scene related to the project, and bring in the threat 
to the Ark to escalate the situation.
Take Your Time. During the first session, the play-
ers get a feel for their characters. They need to find 
their place in the Ark, to test their relationships 
to the NPCs. Give it some time. Listen more than 
you speak. Use the projects, use the threat, use the 
relationships to NPCs when you feel the need to 
move the story along, but don’t push it too hard. 
Ask questions, take notes. See the first session as a 
prologue, before the real action starts.
Use What You Learn. When the first session is over, 
things will already have happened. Conflicts have 
been established, relationships tested. Planning 
your second session, you’ll have plenty of threads to 
pull. You’ll have an idea of where the story will go.
PREPARING SESSIONS
From the second session and onward, you can pre-
pare a little more. Build on what you have established 
earlier, and spend a little bit of time before the ses-
sion to think about what might happen next. You can:
 K Think up a few pre-prepared events, but no 
more than one or two per PC.
 K Choose a new threat against the Ark (Chapter 
10), unless you prefer to keep drawing ran-
dom Threat Cards.
 K If the PCs are in the Zone, prepare an encoun-
ter with a group, monster or phenomenon 
(Chapter 13).
 K Choose a special Zone sector (Chapter 15) to 
place in the PCs path or lure them toward.
 K Choose one of the clues pointing the way to 
Eden (Chapter 16), and consider how the PCs 
might find it.
 K Make up something completely different.
Avoid preparing too much – the more detailed your 
plans are, the harder they are to adapt to the players 
actions. 15–30 minutes of prep time before a ses-
sion is usually enough. Trust the players and the 
mechanics of the game to create story and drama!
NON-PLAYER CHARACTERS
You command acid storms and atomic winters. 
Zone monsters and battle droids follow your every 
word. Yet, your most powerful tools are your NP

--- PAGE 141

09
1 3 9
Your job as gamemaster
The Coward talent (page 66) can be very useful to 
keep an important NPC alive for longer.
Mutations:  A typical NPC has one random mu-
tation and three Mutation Points. If you want to 
make a particular NPC a tougher opponent, you 
can give him more mutations and more MP than 
normal. Giving an NPC a mutation with a defensive 
effect is also a good way to protect him.
Name, Appearance, Goal:  Beyond the numeric 
stats, there are three things you need to know about 
every NPC:
 K What’s his name?
 K What does he look like and how does he act?
 K What does he want?
To help you to quickly create an NPC, there is an 
extensive table at the end of this chapter. Pick the 
stats and traits that you like, or let the dice make the 
choice for you. Write the information down. Make 
a list of all NPCs that have been introduced, and 
keep it at hand when you play.
PLAYING NPCs
Technically, NPCs work just like PCs. They need 
resources in the same way, they need to be Healed 
if broken, and they can develop new mutations. But 
in practice, you should ignore all game mechan-
ics for NPCs as long as they don’t directly affect 
a PC. Don’t count grub and water for every NPC 
who follows the PCs into the Zone – instead keep 
the freedom to decide when their resources run out, 
for maximum dramatic effect. Don’t roll dice for 
NPCs’ actions unless they attack or Heal a PC. You 
can roll for NPC actions in other situation too if it 
heightens the drama, but as a rule, don’t.
NPCs in Groups:  When you handle several NPCs 
with identical stats, you can let them perform actions 
in a group instead of individually. See Chapter 3.
LET THEM LIVE
If you can, avoid having NPCs dying too 
quickly. An NPC who survives and can 
come back is much more interesting than 
a dead NPC. In the Ark, there is always 
some Bonesaw around who can save a 
dying NPC.
Avoid giving the PCs the chance 
to get to an important NPC at an early 
stage – if they have enough MP, nothing 
can stop them. Try to place henchmen 
in the way, so that the PCs need to deal 
with them first.
If the PCs despite your best efforts 
kill off an enemy Boss or some other 
important NPC – let it

--- PAGE 142

09
1 4 0
GAmemaster’s Section
FINE-TUNING THE OPPOSITION
As GM, it’s your job to make conflicts exciting by 
making sure the PCs face challenging opposition. 
Use the number of opponents, 
their mutations and their weap-
ons as measures to calibrate the 
difficulty.
A good rule of thumb is that a group of PCs 
in decent shape will generally be able to defeat a 
group of NPCs of similar size and gear, as long as 
they have some MP to use. In combat, the enemies’ 
level of Strength is also important to look at – a 
group of Enforcers can be a hard to beat even for 
battle-hardened PCs.
As GM, you are always free to decide whether or 
not to use the NPCs’ Mutation Points. If a fight is go-
ing badly for the PCs, hold off using the NPCs’ MP 
to give the PCs a fighting chance to turn the tide.
The Zone is a dangerous place, and sometimes 
the PCs will encounter opponents they simply 
cannot beat. Remind the players that they can 
escape (using the Move skill) and don’t need to 
fight to death. Also remember that NPCs can Heal 
dying PCs.
BRING NPCs INTO THE ZONE
Back at home in the Ark, the PCs are sur-
rounded by NPCs that they already know. 
You can let a PC run into an NPC that 
wants something from him. In the Zone, 
most NPCs the PCs meet will be stran-
gers. It can be a good idea to let some of 
the plots in the Ark follow the PCs into 
the Zone, by sending one or more NPCs 
with them for the journey. Use these 
NPCs to help the PCs, or create trouble 
for them. They may have hidden agendas 
– maybe they secretly serve a rival Boss.
RELATIONSHIP MAP
A convenient way to handle NPCs is to 
use a relationship map. Grab a blank 
piece of paper and write down the PCs’ 
names in the corners. In the middle, note 
down the names of the most important 
Bosses in the Ark. Between them, wher-
ever there is space for it, write down 
the names of other NPCs that the PCs 
have relationships to. Then, draw lines 
between names to mark a relationship, 
and write a word or two next to the line 
to describe it. The relationship map will 
grow as play progresses and becomes a 
valuable tool for you as a GM. It can give 
you lots of ideas for dramatic events to 
spring on the pla

--- PAGE 143

09
1 4 1
Your job as gamemaster
DEALING WITH RESOURCES
Bullets, grub and Rot-free water are scarce com-
modities, and the game will often revolve around 
acquiring these resources. It’s an important part 
of your job as a GM to make the PCs fight for 
these resources – but don’t make them impossi-
ble to come by. Some roles have their own ways 
of getting grub and water written into the rules 
(the Fixer and the Boss in the Ark, the Stalker in 
the Zone), but most of the time, you as GM are in 
control of how much the PCs can get their hands 
on. Some advice:
Vary the Supply. Let the PCs find grub easily now 
and then, in particular when the focus of the game 
is on something else. Other times, make them risk 
their lives for a single ration of grub. This will teach 
the players not to take the resources for granted, 
but at the same time not make them spend all their 
time looking for them.
Err on the Side of More. Don’t be afraid to give the 
PCs plenty of grub and water every now and then. 
When in doubt, give more rather than less. The PCs 
can’t carry all that much anyway, and if they get 
their hands on a big stash, someone is sooner or 
later bound to try to take it from them!
RANDOM GENERATION OF NPCs
e nforcer S
D6 n a M e aP P ea rance g oa l w ea P on
1 Hugust Hulking posture, ape-like arms, 
grunts
Stop fighting and build something 
instead
Brass knuckles
2 Ingrit Short and stocky, hoarse voice Beat up anyone in her way Bicycle chain
3 Lenny Wiry, skinny and muscular Live another day, there is nothing else Spiked bat
4 Marl Fat and with a wheezing voice Torment others and hear them scream Scrap knife
5 Nelma Grotesquely tall, abnormal face Please the Boss Scrap axe
6 Rebeth Weathered and scarred, hissing voice Show who’s strongest Scrap pistol
g earhea DS
D6 n a M e aP P ea rance g oa l w ea P on
1 Quark Skinny, spiked hair, always smiling Find Eden and the truth about the 
People
Scrap pistol, Gear Bonus 
+2
2 Lambda Old blue coveralls, tools in every 
pocket
Recreate the technical marvels of the 
Old Age
Scrap pistol with three 
barrels
3 Loranga Bald, extremely dirty, kind Build things to help others None
4 Naphta Burn-scarred skin, googles, smel

--- PAGE 144

09
1 4 2
GAmemaster’s Section
Stal K er S
D6 n a M e aP P ea rance g oa l w ea P on
1 Danko Always wears a gasmask, never 
speaks
Go farther into the Zone than anyone 
else
Scrap rifle, Gear Bonus 
+2
2 Franton Scarred face, brags a lot Be revered as a hero by the People Scrap pistol with two 
barrels
3 Hammed Dead eyes, coughs from Rot damage, 
smells of booze
Walk into the Zone and let the Rot 
take him
Scrap spear
4 Jena Camouflage gear, constantly fiddles 
with her gun
Stalk a victim for days and then kill it Scrap rifle, weapon 
damage 3
5 Krin Skinny and wiry, always on her guard Keep out of trouble, avoid others Bow, Gear Bonus +2
6 Tula Wears a torn raincoat, pulls an old 
shopping cart
Find something worth fighting for Slingshot
f ixer S
D6 n a M e aP P ea rance g oa l w ea P on
1 Abed Bald and pudgy, constantly smiling Make the deal of a lifetime Scrap knife
2 Denrik Unnaturally handsome, shiny hair Make others feel good and take 
advantage of it
—
3 Fillix Stares at others’ gear, kleptomaniac Collect a large stockpile of grub and 
gear
Scrap pistol, Gear Bonus 
+2
4 Jolisa Skinny, large staring eyes Abnormally interested in artifacts and 
scrap
Bicycle chain
5 Lula Abnormally short, talks constantly Swindle the last bullet from everyone 
else
Scrap pistol
6 Monja Wheezing voice, always wants to 
trade something
Become a Boss one day Scrap knife
Dog h an D le r S
D6 n a M e aP P ea rance g oa l w ea P on
1 Anny Chews on a root, spits constantly Find someone other than her dog to 
care for
Slingshot
2 Brie Black bangs cover a deformed eye Kill anyone who comments on her 
appearance
Scrap knife
3 Finn Greenish, rough skin, mostly drunk Forget his sorrows Baseball bat
4 Jony Face shaded by hood, silent and 
aggressive
Leave the Ark and find a better life Scrap axe
5 Krinnel Only talks to her dog, never to people Give her dog something good to eat Bow
6 Montiac Crew cut, irritable and violent Beat up anyone who speaks ill of his 
dog
Brass knuckles
c hronicler S
D6 n a M e aP P ea rance g oa l w ea P on
1 Astrina Red mohawk, sees good in everyone Find a hero who can save the People Scrap knife
2 Danova Wears a dress from the Old Age Understand what the El

--- PAGE 145

09
1 4 3
Your job as gamemaster
D6 n a M e aP P ea rance g oa l w ea P on
4 Maxim Skinny and weak, aged beyond his 
years
Write the story of how the People 
finds Eden
–
5 Silas Unnaturally pale, translucent skin, 
sad
To make the Ark evolve into an ad-
vanced society
–
6 Victon Boyish, reddish complexion, always 
happy 
Become the hero in the story about 
the People
Scrap knife
b o SS e S
D6 n a M e aP P ea rance g oa l w ea P on
1 Brictoria Cold eyes, scarred face, crew cut Turn the People into an army and con-
quer the Zone
Scrap rifle, Gear Bonus 
+2
2 Gunitt Short, skinny, wears a top hat Collect large amounts of artifacts Scrap pistol with three 
barrels
3 Cristor Tall and skinny, fiery eyes Topple the Elder and establish equal-
ity in the Ark
Spiked bat
4 Marlotte Cool and detached Develop the Ark and lead the People 
to a better life
—
5 Mohamin Legless and is carried around by 
Slaves
Rally more followers and leave the 
Ark with his cult
Scrap knife
6 Oscartian Extremely fat, can hardly move Get rid of all rivals and take sole 
power in the Ark
Scrap pistol, weapon 
damage 3
Slave S
D6 n a M e aP P ea rance g oa l w ea P on
1 Dink Silent and observant, bitter and 
treacherous
Find someone to use to get free —
2 Eria Arms and legs like logs, grim Toil away without complaining —
3 Henny Dirty, always hums on some melody See the bright side of things —
4 Hent Massive body with knobby skin, 
hunchback
Work and suffer until death sets him 
free
—
5 Lin Wiry and grumpy, fights a lot To take her aggressions out on 
anyone
—
6 Wilo Skinny and weak, a dreamer To escape from the Ark and never 
come back
—
OTHER COMMON NAMES
Abar, Alia, Alix, Almenkir, Amala, 
Augustian, Bark, Benso, Delta, Doda, Dunk, 
Edin, Elona, Emalina, Emdor, Endel, Ergom, 
Erian, Erister, Felin, Fils, Gerber, Grits, 
Gros, Hild, Ibit, Iridia, Johalin, Jol, Jonar, 
Juna, Juperia, Kalgu, Kaska, Katin, Kim, 
Koli, Leodor, Landon, Lard, Linna, Margot, 
Marlian, Makron, Markot, Mart, Max,  
 
Mintel, Miri, Mohan, Molger, Morris, 
Mubba, Natara, Nelma, Nely, Novia, Octane, 
Olias, Olli, Oslo, Otiak, Plonk, Piro, Pontis, 
Rasper, Regis, Rog, Rutger, Sagabet, Sari, 
Savik, Silia, Siniss, Slabados,

--- PAGE 146





--- PAGE 147

10
1 4 5
Threats Against the Ark
10
Threats 
against the Ark
The Threat Cards describe internal and external 
threats to the Ark. Draw a new Threat Card at the 
start of each session, or whenever you feel like 
stirring things up. There are three ways to draw 
a Threat Card – you should agree in the group be-
forehand which method to use:
1.	Let a player draw a Threat Card and read the 
text out loud.
2.	Draw a Threat Card yourself, without reveal-
ing its content.
3.	Deliberately choose a Threat Card, rather 
than picking one randomly.
INTRODUCING THREATS
The new threat will, together with any new or ongo-
ing project, create a backdrop for the session. All of 
the People will be affected by the threat, including 
the PCs. If they are not affected directly, then have 
an NPC they care about get into trouble.
However, the threat does not have to dominate 
the session completely. If the PCs are already knee-
deep in intrigue and action, leave them to it. Or why 
not throw the new threat into the mix, to shift the 
balance of power in some interesting way?
It’s your job as a GM to introduce the new 
threat into the game. Use the threat as a basis for 
events that you unleash on the PCs (Chapter 9). 
You should introduce a new threat pretty early in 
the session, but it doesn’t need to be the very first 
thing that happens.
ESCALATING THREATS
The texts on the Threat Cards are brief and leave 
many questions unanswered. That’s intentional – 
the cards don’t give away the full  truth behind the 
threat, since the players are meant to be able to 
read them. The rest of this chapter repeats all the 
information on the Threat Cards, and expands on it 
with suggestions about how the threats can escalate.
To Escalate a Threat is one of the ten standard 
events in the Ark, as set out in Chapter 9. Of course, 
you are free to change or add to these threats as 
you see fit, or make up something completely dif-
ferent. How the threats play out also depends on 
the PCs’ actions. Note which threats you have 



--- PAGE 148

10
1 4 6
GAmemaster’s Section
introduced into the game, and keep a record on 
how they evolve.
BOSS vs BOSS
A Boss sees an opportunity to become top dog. Dur-
ing one bloody night, she tries to wipe out all of 
her competition and become the sole ruler of the 
Ark. But one of her rivals survives, and launches a 
counter-offensive. No one in the Ark is unaffected 
– if you don’t pick a side, no one will protect you 
against the raging violence.
 K Both rivaling Bosses try to recruit the PCs to 
their cause – with force, if necessary. PCs can 
end up on opposing sides.
 K A third Boss preaches calm and unity, and 
wins the People’s support. Soon, he is tar-
geted in an assassination attempt. The PCs 
can carry out the deed or try to stop it.
 K Finally, the Elder steps forward and speaks to 
the People. But is it too late to stop the vio-
lence, will the People listen?
A CHILD OF THE PEOPLE
The Slave Sira has complained of stomach pains 
for some time, but who cares about a Slave? Now 
everyone cares. They say that Sira will give birth to 
a child. The news spreads like wildfire in the Ark. If 
it’s true, it’s the first time that anyone can remember 
that a child is born to the People.
 K A violent power-struggle erupts between 
Bosses who want to claim Sira and her un-
born child for themselves. She quickly be-
comes a symbol of the People’s future. Some-
one might try to kidnap her – or hire the PCs 
to do it.
 K Sira refuses to say who the father is. Perhaps 
it’s a mutant in the Ark, and the conception is 
just a random accident of nature. Or the father 
is someone from outside, like The Man on the 
Beach (page 148), one of the Wanderers (page 
152) or even a Zone-Ghoul (page 176).
 K After some time, Sira gives birth. The People 
celebrate, but the joy doesn’t last. The baby 
is ill. Maybe there is a cure somewhere in the 
Zone? In the meantime, the rivalry continues 
between Bosses who want to take care of Sira 
RANDOM T HR EATS  T AB LE
If
 you don’t have access to the Mutant: Year 
Zero Card Deck , roll D66 on the table below 
instead. All of the information on the cards is 
repeated – and expanded on – in this chapter.
threat S ag ain S t  th e  ar K
11 

--- PAGE 149

10
1 4 7
Threats Against the Ark
and the child. She might react by fleeing the 
Ark – and if she does, she will be hunted.
THE DERELICT OIL RIG
Through the thick fog of the Zone it comes floating 
slowly – a gigantic rusting metal hulk. The four-
legged oil platform, as tall as the ruins at the heart 
of the Zone, beaches and casts its ominous shadow 
over the Ark. What secrets could be hidden inside it?
 K Someone, preferably PCs, climb on board the 
oil rig. They find several artifacts, but also 
dozens of corpses. Strangely enough, they 
seem to have been beaten to death – very 
recently. Some are still warm. The dead 
don’t seem to be mutants, but some carry 
deformations.
 K Log books show that the crew has lived on 
the oil rig for generations – may ever since 
the Fall. This find may make the players won-
der about the People’s own origin – how and 
when did they actually come to the Ark?
 K Deep inside the oil rig, there is a survivor. He 
is completely out of his mind and is guilty of 
killing the others. He now stalks the intruders 
and tries to kill them off one by one. If caught, 
he rambles on about “Project Eden” and 
seems terrified of the mutants.
THE HELLDRIVERS
It sounds like a thunderstorm in the distance. But 
coming closer, the noise turns into the loud rev-
ving of powerful engines, and every mutant in the 
Ark runs to see what is coming. Dozens of cars and 
motorcycles with grim drivers and riders roll up 
to the gates. Stalkers have told stories about the 
fearsome Helldrivers, few thought they were real. 
Now, they are here.
 K The Helldrivers (page 173) besiege the Ark. 
They demand booze and grub in return for 
not burning to the Ark to the ground with 
their mounted flamethrowers.
 K The Helldrivers try to recruit a PC, or an NPC 
with a relationship to a PC.
 K The situation sooner or later escalates to 
open violence – unless the Helldrivers 
can be persuaded to leave, or somehow be 
out-maneuvered.
THE HUNGER
Grub has been scarce in the Ark for some time, but 
now the situation is truly desperate. The stockpile 
of canned food is gone, and every mutant has to 
find their own means to feed themselves. Starvation 
sets in and the fi

--- PAGE 150

10
1 4 8
GAmemaster’s Section
Comment:  Read more about robots on page 177. 
They will be described in depth in an upcoming 
expansion to Mutant: Year Zero.
THE LAST DROP
The water source in the Ark fails. The well goes 
dry, the water purifier breaks down or the cistern 
bursts – whatever the reason, it’s a disaster. What-
ever Rot-free water is left in cans and bottles will 
only last a few days.
 K A Boss tries to take control of what little wa-
ter is left. Things get violent.
 K Dehydrated mutants turn to drinking rotwa-
ter from puddles and streams, and Rot fever 
spreads in the Ark.
 K In the end, the People have no other choice 
than to find a new water source – or spare 
parts if they can fix the old one.
LOST TREASURE
An expensive and important item in the Ark has 
disappeared without a trace. It can be something 
the People have built: a tool, a spare part, or an 
artifact from the Old Age. The item has been sto-
len in the dead of night. Now, everyone suspects 
everyone else.
 K A PC, or an NPC with a relationship to a PC, 
is accused of the theft.
 K A PC learns who is behind the theft. What 
does he do with this information?
 K The perpetrator – or someone who is unjustly 
accused – flees the Ark. A lynch mob is or-
ganized to find him.
THE MAN ON THE BEACH
No one knows where the man without memory 
came from. One cold morning he lies shivering 
with hypothermia on a beach near the Ark, where 
some scavengers find him. He speaks in a strange, 
foreign accent, but manages to explain that he can’t 
remember who he is. Apart from a worn coverall 
with strange markings, there are no clues to his 
origin. He seems to lack all mutations.
 K The stranger’s arrival causes a great stir in 
the Ark. Several Bosses want to lock him up 
and question him. The Chroniclers of the 
Dawn Vault want to talk to him. The struggle 
over what to do with him could turn violent.
 K The man is confused, but step by step, his 
memory returns. His cryptic harangues usu-
ally make no sense, but at some point he 
mentions Project Eden. He can even give a 
clue to the location of Eden (Chapter 16).
 K The stranger’s mind seems to clear up, he 
seems more lucid, when suddenly, 

--- PAGE 151

10
1 4 9
Threats Against the Ark
 K The expedition makes contact with another 
faction in the Zone.
MURDER IN THE ARK
A generally well-liked person in the Ark, or someone 
close to a PC, is found brutally murdered one morn-
ing. The body has been hacked to pieces. Nothing 
like this has ever happened in the Ark before.
 K Soon, the killer is found, sitting catatonic and 
covered in blood in his den. He has only one 
excuse: The voices made me do it.
 K It happens again. One mutant in a seemingly 
happy couple beats her partner to death, and 
then blames the “voices”. Paranoia grips the 
Ark.
 K A PC is affected. Suddenly, he just knows 
a another PC must die, right now. He must 
immediately Fight, and won’t stop until he is 
broken or grappled down. Then, suddenly, the 
voices stop.
 K The source of the murderous voices is a dy-
ing mutant, whose mind is falling apart. His 
psionic nightmares randomly affect innocent 
victims. When the People find out – how will 
they deal with him?
MUTANT MESSIAH
A minor Boss dreams strange dreams and begins 
to proclaim his visions of death and destruction to 
the People. Fatalistic hopelessness and the futility 
of all things are the core elements of this message, 
which attracts a growing number of followers.
 K A friend of a PC joins the cult, and soon asks 
the PC to join too. The cult grows daily, caus-
ing concern among the other Bosses.
 K The cultists begin refusing to take part in any 
of the projects in the Ark, instead spending 
their days performing bizarre rituals. The rest 
of the People suffer, and resentment towards 
the cult grows.
 K Finally, things come to a head – the cult must 
be disbanded, leave the Ark or be destroyed. 
Maybe the PCs get caught in the middle.
THE MYSTERIOUS RUIN
A Stalker has seen a strange building in the Zone. 
Could there be grub or bullets there? A Boss 
wants to send out an expedition, and is looking 
for volunteers.
 K If the PCs don’t volunteer, an NPC they have 
a relationship to asks them to come.
 K A rival Boss tries to sabotage the expedition. 
He sends along a secret provocateur, who 
tries to make everything go wrong.
 K If the PCs visit the strange building and 
return, 

--- PAGE 152

10
1 5 0
GAmemaster’s Section
peaceful coexistence vanishes quickly, and a 
violent showdown ensues.
Comment:  Read more about beast mutants in 
Chapter 13. They will be described in depth in a 
coming expansion to Mutant: Year Zero.
THE OTHER PEOPLE
They come walking out of the smog without warn-
ing. A group of mutants just like the People – but 
not as skinny and miserable. They say they come 
from a settlement out in the Zone, another Ark – 
and they want an alliance. They ask some of the 
People to come with them to their Ark, as guests.
 K The visitors tell the People about the good 
life in their Ark. They say it’s ruled by the 
benevolent “Chairman”, and no mutant has to 
go hungry. The visit divides the People into 
two camps – one wants to visit the other Ark, 
the other wants the visitors dead or in chains.
 K Finally, the People decide to send an expedi-
tion the other Ark. Try to get the PCs to join.
Comment:  Read more about other Arks in Chap-
ter 13. A complete example of another Ark can be 
found in Chapter 15.
PROJECT SABOTAGED
Under the cover of darkness, someone has sabo-
taged an important project in the Ark (Chapter 8). 
All of the hard work is lost, and needs to be redone 
from scratch. Everyone whispers about who did it 
and why, and the People start to regard each other 
with suspicion.
 K A rumor spreads that the guilty person is an 
NPC (preferably a Chronicler or Gearhead) 
with a relationship to a PC.
 K The suspected NPC comes to the PC for pro-
tection, to save himself from being lynched. A 
Boss wants him punished.
 K The NPC reveals that he actually is the guilty 
party. He wants to stop all attempts to build 
a new society, to avoid another Apocalypse at 
any cost.
Comment: Chapter 7 explains what happens rules-
wise when a project is destroyed.
REVOLUTION!
Discontent is brewing among the People. The mu-
tants hunger, while the Bosses have their fill. All 
it takes is a spark – an Enforcer strikes his Boss 
– and soon the entire Ark is set aflame as Slaves 
rise against their owners and take revenge for years 
of abuse.
 K A Boss that a PC has a good relationship with 
is about to be lynched. Perhaps an NPC that 
a PC is close 

--- PAGE 153

10
1 5 1
Threats Against the Ark
 K In the tunnels, the explorers may find an old 
supply room, with thick layers of dust but 
also some useful artifacts.
 K Further down, there is big mysterious 
 ma
chine that still seems to be active. The 
machine can activate robots (page 177) or the 
remains of a computerized defense system.
STARFALL
Suddenly, night turns into day. A light in the sky, 
stronger than any star, shoots across the night sky 
from east to west. The fireball disappears for an 
instant, darkness briefly falling over the Zone again. 
Then the horizon suddenly lights up in a massive 
but silent explosion.
 K The starfall spreads fear in the Ark. A cult 
leader begins to preach that the People 
should all leave the Ark and travel to the 
place of impact. Among his followers is an 
NPC close to a PC.
 K The cult is about to leave, but is stopped by 
force by another Boss who refuses to let the 
People split apart.
 K An expedition is sent to the point of im-
pact. There is nothing there, apart from 



--- PAGE 154

10
1 5 2
GAmemaster’s Section
Rot-contaminated debris of some strange ves-
sel and a deadly robot (page 177) with orders 
to kill all mutants it comes across…
THE WANDERERS
They come wandering through the Zone, a scrawny 
and grim-faced bunch in tattered old clothes. They 
speak in a strange and foreign accent, but manage 
to explain that they have wandered for several years 
from the mountains far away. They ask the People 
for grub and protection. None of the wanderers 
seem to have any mutations at all.
 K It turns out that the wanderers intend to set-
tle in the area for good – inside the Ark, or 
just outside of it. Some of the wanderers treat 
mutants as subordinate beings.
 K Some Bosses grow increasingly hostile to-
wards the wanderers, who start to act as if 
they owned the place. Arguments and fist-
fights break out.
 K One fight ends with a wanderer getting killed 
by a mutant. The conflict risks escalating into 
open war, unless the two sides find a way to 
coexist peacefully. Whatever happens, the 
wanderers intend to settle in the Zone for 
good.
Comment:  The unmutated humans and their origin 
will be described in depth in a future expansion to 
the game.
THE ZONE CULT
There are rumors about a cult said to live in an 
ancient bunker out in the zonelands. Stalkers have 
seen men and women in long robes, strangely un-
touched by the filth and cold of the Zone. Who are 
they? Where do they come from? Do they have 
knowledge or artifacts that can benefit the People?
 K An NPC close to a PC says that she has met 
one of the robed people near the Ark. She 
says they are magical beings, and wants help 
to visit them. She thinks she knows where 
their bunker is.
 K A few robed cultists suddenly appear by the 
gate of the Ark. They are not talkative, and re-
veal nothing about themselves. They want to 
know if there are any unmutated humans in 
the Ark (such as the Wanderers, page 152, or 
the Man on the Beach, page 148). If so, they 
want to barter goods in exchange for these 
humans coming with them. If the People 
refuse, the cultists will attempt a kidnapping 
at some point.
 K The People start to distrust the cultists and 
fear their mental powers, i

--- PAGE 155

10
D EVOURER  (PAGE 178)
1 5 3
Threats Against the Ark
ZONE-GHOULS ATTACK
They attack before dawn, without warning or mercy. 
They come from the deeps of the Zone, and enter 
the Ark while the People are sleeping. Then, the 
massacre begins. The Zone-Ghouls kill, burn and 
plunder with a feverish frenzy. Can the People stop 
them – or is this the end?
 K One PC witnesses how an NPC he has a 
relationship to is surrounded by frenzied 
Zone-Ghouls.
 K The Zone-Ghouls set fire to part of the Ark. 
The flames spread quickly.
 K An NPC or a Boss tells a PC to flee with him. 
The Ark is lost and staying is suicide, he says.
Comment: Read more about the Zone-Ghouls on 
page 176. Use the rules for attacks against the Ark 
(page 114) to determine the flow of the battle. The 
attackers have Battle Level 2, or higher.
THE ZONE MONSTER
The People have had enough. There is a wild beast 
about that has torn mutants to pieces out in the 
Zone, and even started attacking people collecting 
scrap right outside the Ark’s walls. A Boss wants 
to lead a hunting expedition into the Zone to deal 
this threat once and for all.
 K The expedition leaves to hunt the beast. PCs 
are asked to join.
 K The beast can be a razorback (page 180), a 
devourer (page 178), or some other ferocious 
monster in Chapter 13. The hunting party 
finds the beast’s lair, riddled with remains of 
Zone-Ghouls and mutants.
 K The hunting team confronts the beast in a 
fight to the death. An expedition from an-
other Ark, or a group of Zone-Ghouls, can 
help or hinder.
THE ZONE SHAKES
It starts as a deep rumble from the very 
ground itself. Then the earth shakes, soon 
violently. Anyone not holding on to something 
is thrown to the ground. Then, as suddenly as it 
started, it’s over. For now.
 K The quakes return, even stronger. The Ark is 
damaged by the tremors, perhaps destroying 
a project.
 K A Boss (preferably a Cultist, page 100) pro-
claims that the quakes are a bad omen, a sign 
of the Ancients’ dissatisfaction with the Peo-
ple and a call for repentance.
 K The PCs and other mutants might search for 
the cause of the tremors. It is detonations in 
a bunker deep underground, a war between 
rival secu
