--- PAGE 50

03
4 8
Player’s Section
E X A M P L E
Sixter has locked himself into his trailer. Hugust 
wants to push the entire trailer into the dirty creek 
nearby. Hugust has Strength 5 and Force skill level 1, 
but the GM says the action is hard and gives Hugust 
a −2 modification. Accordingly, he rolls five Base 
Dice and one negative Skill Die. He rolls one / on 
the Base Dice but also on the Skill Die! This / elimi-
nates the other, and the roll fails. Hugust needs to 
consider whether it’s worth it to push the roll.
HELP FROM OTHERS
Other PCs or NPCs around you can help you suc-
ceed. They have to say so up front, before you roll 
your dice. It also has to make sense in terms of the 
story – they have to be physically present and be 
able to support your action in a direct way. The 
GM has final say.
For every person helping you, you get a +1 modi-
fication. No more than three people can help you 
make the roll, which means your maximum modi-
fication for help from others is +3.
Specialist Skills: You can not get help when using 
your specialist skill. When using a specialist skill, 
you are always on you own.
Conflicts: If you help someone in a conflict (Chap-
ter 6) you lose your own action in the turn. You can 
still perform a maneuver, however (page 80).
Chroniclers  have the specialist skill Inspire, which 
is also used to help others perform actions. See 
more on page 59.
NPCs can help each other in the same way as PCs. 
Letting NPCs act in groups rather than individually 
is often a useful way to handle a large number of 
NPCs in conflicts.
E X A M P L E
Krin and her friends are back out in the Zone. Krin 
wants to climb into a ruined house, where she thinks 
there might be artifacts. Hugust helps her up, and 
Krin gets a +1 modification to her roll.
SIMULTANEOUS ACTIONS
You and the other PCs can not  help each other when 
you’re acting simultaneously , that is, performing the 
same action side by side. Examples are struggling 
your way through a fierce snowstorm (Endure) or 
sneaking up on a group of Zone-Ghouls (Sneak). In 
this case, you all roll separate rolls. If you want to 
help someone, you can’t perform the action yourself.
Stunts: If you roll several

--- PAGE 51

03
4 9
Skills
can even choose this stunt when you only 
roll one / – that means you help you 
friend while sacrificing yourself.
FORCE (STRENGTH)
When wreckage or debris block your way 
and you need to push or lift something 
heavy, roll for Force. Use this skill for any 
feat of strength.
Failure:  It’s just too heavy. You need to 
find another way. And what if the noise you 
made attracted unwanted company?
Success: With a groan, you push through and get 
whatever it was out of your way.
Stunts:  If you roll extra / beyond the first, 
choose one of these stunts:
 K You push or throw the object with great 
force. One target of your choice within 
Arm’s Length suffers damage equal to 
the number of extra /.
 K If applicable in the situation, you find or 
reveal a hidden passage or object. The GM 
decides what it is.
FIGHT (STRENGTH)
The world of Mutant: Year Zero  is a brutal place. 
Sometimes, you have no choice but to fight for your 
life, eye to eye. Roll for this skill when you attack 
someone in close combat. Read more about con-
flicts in Chapter 6.
Failure:  You stumble and miss. Now it’s your op-
ponent’s turn…
Success:  You hit, and inflict weapon damage (page 
87) on your opponent.
Stunts: For every extra / you roll, choose one of 
these stunts:
 K You inflict one more point of damage. You 
can choose this stunt multiple times, if you 
roll several /.
 K You subdue or tire your enemy. He suffers 
one point of fatigue (page 88).
 K You increase your initiative score by 2 (page 
80), taking effect next turn.
 K You knock or pull a weapon or other object 
from your opponent. You choose which. Dur-
ing a conflict, picking up a dropped object 
counts as a maneuver (page 80).
 K Your opponent falls to the ground or is 
pushed back, for example through a doorway 
or over a cliff.
ENDURE



--- PAGE 52

03
5 0
Player’s Section
 K You hold the opponent in a grapple. He needs 
to successfully Fight you to break free, and 
can’t perform any other action (or any maneu-
ver) until he has done so – or until you are 
broken or let him go.
Weapons:  When you Fight you can use weapons 
such as clubs, knives and spears. Read more on 
page 83.
Defense:  When someone Fights you, you can try to 
defend yourself. When you defend, you also roll for 
Fight, with a specific set of stunts available. Read 
more on page 84.
SNEAK (AGILITY)
Often enough, it’s wiser to avoid conflict and in-
stead Sneak by your enemies. Use this skill when 
you try to move without being noticed, when you 
set up an ambush or when you attempt a sneak 
attack (page 81).
Failure: Your enemy sees you or hears you, and the 
element of surprise is lost.
Success: You move like a shadow in the night, no-
ticed by no one.
Stunt: When setting up a sneak attack, you get a 
+1 modification to your first attack for every extra 
/ rolled after the first.
MOVE (AGILITY)
When the heat is on and you are trying to dodge 
the jaws of death, you need to keep a cool head 
and Move fast. Roll for Move when you want to get 
out of a conflict or some other hazardous situation. 
Read more about how this skill is used in conflicts 
in Chapter 6.
Failure:  You are pinned down, backed into a corner 
with no way out. Get ready for a fight.
Success: You get out of the sticky situation, and 
live to fight another day.
Stunt: For every / you roll, you can help a friend 
(PC or NPC) in the same spot of trouble as you. He 
makes it out, and doesn’t have to roll himself. You 
can even choose this stunt when you only roll one 
/ – that means you help you friend while sacrific-
ing yourself.
Acrobatics: Also use the Move skill when balanc-
ing, jumping or climbing. Failure in these cases can 
be fatal!
SHOOT (AGILITY)
If you have a gun, and a bullet to load it with, you 
can take down your enemy from a distance without 
getting your hands bloody. You can barter for Jury-
Rigged guns in the Ark (see the list at the back of 
the book), and more powerful weapons from the 
Old Age can be found in the Zone.
Failure: The shot misses your ta

--- PAGE 53

03
5 1
Skills
Stunts: For every extra / you roll, choose one of 
these stunts:
 K You inflict one more point of damage. You 
can choose this stunt multiple times, if you 
roll several /.
 K You pin down your enemy. He suffers one 
point of fatigue (page 88).
 K You increase your initiative score by 2 (page 
80), effective as of the next turn.
 K Your target drops a weapon or another hand-
held object. You choose which.
 K Your opponent falls to the ground or is 
pushed back, for example through a doorway 
or over a cliff.
Reloading:  Scrap guns are usually loaded with just 
one bullet at a time. When you have fired it, you’ll 
need to reload before you can fire again. Reload-
ing is a maneuver  in conflicts. Some scrap guns 
(page 55) and artifacts have magazines with sev-
eral bullets, letting you fire again and again without 
reloading.
SCOUT (WITS)
In the Zone you need to keep your eyes open if you 
want to stay alive. When you spot something in the 
distance, you roll for Scout in order to learn more 
about it. It can be a place, a person, or a creature.
Failure: You can’t really make out what it is, or you 
mistake it for something else (the GM feeds you 
false information).
Success: You are able to make out what it is, and 
if it appears like a threat to you or not. The exact 
information you get is up to the GM.
Stunts:  For every extra / you roll, you get to know 
the answer to one of these questions:
 K Is it coming for me?
 K Are there more of them close by?
 K How do I get in/past/away?
Comment:  Only roll to Scout when you are actively 
looking at or for something. You don’t roll when 
another person or creature is sneaking up on you 
– instead, they roll to Sneak.
COMPREHEND (WITS)
The world after the Apocalypse is a strange, incom-
prehensible place for most mutants. The knowledge 
of the Old Age has been worn out, just like the crum-
bling ruins of the dead cities. Roll for Comprehend 
SCOUT
DON’T ROLL TO SPOT 
HIDDEN THINGS
Don’t roll for Scout when searching for 
hidden objects close to you, such as 
secret doors or hidden clues. If you de-
scribe searching in the right place, the 
GM should simply let you find whatever 
is there. No dice roll 

--- PAGE 54

03
5 2
Player’s Section
when you want to read an old text, know what a 
particular ruin was used for, or understand and use 
an artifact whose DEV level is higher than the Ark’s. 
Read more about using artifacts in Chapter 7.
Failure:  The object of your study makes no sense to 
you at all, or you are mistaken (in this case, the GM 
can feed you false information about the object):
Success: You understand the nature or function of 
the object. If it’s an artifact, you can use it.
Stunts: For every / rolled beyond the first, you can 
teach someone else how to use the artifact. 
KNOW THE ZONE (WITS)
The zonelands beyond the Ark’s borders are un-
known wastes to most of the People. But there are 
some individuals – mostly Stalkers and some dar-
ing Chroniclers – who have ventured out and seen 
what is out there. Roll for Know the Zone when 
you encounter some creature or phenomenon in 
the Zone and want to know stuff about it. The GM 
will give you a modification depending on how rare 
it is (Chapter 13).
Failure: You have no, or the wrong, idea. The GM 
can feed you false, or a mix of true and false, infor-
mation (in this way, you will know that you have 
failed your roll, but not what information to trust.)
Success:  You know what it is, and its basic traits 
or effects.
Stunts: For every extra / you roll, you get the an-
swer to one of these questions about the creature 
or phenomenon:
 K How can it hurt me?
 K How can I hurt it?
SENSE EMOTION (EMPATHY)
To be able to read another mutant like an open book 
can be a mightier weapon than even a firearm from 
the Old Age. Roll for Sense Emotion when you want 
to know an NPC’s mood or intent toward you. You 
need to be within Short distance (page 80) and it 
takes a few minutes.
Failure: You fail to read, or misread, the NPC. The 
GM can feed you false, or a mix of true and false, 
information.
Success:  The GM must reveal the NPC’s most 
powerful emotion at this point in time – hate, fear, 
contempt, love, etc.
COMPREHEND
MANIPULATE



--- PAGE 55

03
5 3
Skills
Stunts: For every extra / you roll, you get the an-
swer to one of these yes/no questions about the 
NPC:
 K Is he telling the truth?
 K Does he want to hurt me?
 K Does he want something from me?
Strangers: If the NPC is not of the People you get 
a −1 modification to your roll – strangers are harder 
to read.
MANIPULATE (EMPATHY)
Lie, argue, threaten, seduce, or just reason sensibly. 
There are many ways to get another mutant to see 
things your way. The GM will give you a modification 
depending on your bargaining position  (page 82).
Failure: He won’t listen and he won’t do what you 
want. He might start to dislike you, or even attack 
you if provoked.
Success:  He reluctantly does what you want, but 
wants something in return. The GM decides what 
this is, but it must be something you can reasonably 
do. It is up to you whether to accept the deal or not.
Stunts:  Extra / on your roll mean you sow fear and 
doubt in your opponent’s heart. He suffers one point 
of doubt (page 88) for every additional / you roll 
after the first one. If he is broken by doubt, he does 
what you want without demanding a return favor.
Being Manipulated: NPCs and other PCs can Ma-
nipulate you. If their roll succeeds, you must offer 
them a deal of some sort. It’s then up to the GM (or 
the other player) to accept or decline it.
HEAL (EMPATHY)
When you can’t take it anymore, when the Zone 
has broken you and you’ve bitten the irradiated 
dirt, you need friends to help you back up. The Heal 
skill can be used in two ways:
Mend the Broken:  A person who has suffered 
enough trauma to reduce any of the four attributes 
to zero is broken, and can’t carry on. If you success-
fully Heal a broken person, he gets back to his feet 
and immediately recovers a number of attribute 
points equal to the number of / you rolled. No 
resources are needed for this recovery. A failed roll 
has no further effect.
Save a Life: The most important use of the Heal 
skill is to give first aid and stabilize critical injuries 
– which might save your patient’s life. A failed roll in 
this situation could kill him, however, so be careful. 
Read more about this on page 90.
HEAL



--- PAGE 56

03
5 4
Player’s Section
SPECIALIST SKILLS
Beyond the twelve basic skills, each role has one 
unique specialist skill. These are described below.
THE ENFORCER’S SKILL: 
INTIMIDATE (STRENGTH)
Everyone in the Ark knows you’re bad news. Often 
you don’t even need to hit anyone to make them 
back off. You know exactly which buttons to push 
to subdue them – or provoke them. Roll for Intimi-
date when you use your sheer physical presence 
to get someone to do what you want. The rules for 
bargaining position (page 82) apply, just like for 
the Manipulate skill.
Failure: He won’t be pushed around by a bully like 
you. He might even attack you now, or hold the 
grudge for the opportune moment.
Success:  Your opponent must choose – either at-
tack you right now (by Fighting, Shooting or using 
a mutation), or bow to your will.
Stunt: Additional / mean you strike fear into your 
opponent’s heart. He suffers one point of doubt 
(page 88) for every additional / you roll on top 
of the first one.
THE GEARHEAD’S SKILL: 
JURY-RIG (WITS)
The Zone is your own personal promised land. Eve-
rywhere things from the Old Age lie about, things 
you can use to build something new. You constantly 
pick up odd bits of scrap, and at any point in time 
you can sit down for a few hours to Jury-Rig a work-
ing contraption. Some examples:
 K A scrap gun (page 87).
 K Four arrows.
 K Scrap armor, Armor Rating 3 (page 88).
 K A shield, made from a road sign. Armor Rat-
ing 3.
 K A Rot suit. Protection Rating 3 against the 
Rot (page 126).
 K Cold suit. Gives you Gear Bonus +3 to Endure 
severe cold.
 K An explosive charge, Blast Power 6 (page 
94).
 K A flaming torch.
 K A lamp, lit by booze (one dose per hour) or 
the Battery artifact.
 K Binoculars. Gives you Gear Bonus +1 to Scout.
 K A foghorn. Can be heard for miles around.
 K Destillator. Produces D6 doses of booze in a 
few hours.
 K Camouflage. Gives you Gear Bonus +2 to 
Sneak.
 K Scrap raft. Can carry up to five mutants over 
water.
 K A cart. Can carry plenty of scrap and gear.
 K Balloon. Can lift one person a few hundred 
meters through the air, until the hot air runs 
out.
 K Scrap cannon (page 87). Every shot requires 
an explosi

--- PAGE 57

03
5 5
Skills
 K The device will take several days to finish.
 K You need a particular piece of scrap, that you 
don’t have. But you know who does…
 K You need a certain artifact to make the device 
work.
Failure: If you fail the Jury-Rig roll, bad things hap-
pen. The device will fall apart when you really need 
it, or even blow up in your face. You can’t roll for 
the exact same device again, unless you find new 
scrap to use. Alternatively, the GM can set a new 
precondition.
Success:  If you make the roll, your construct works 
– once. Most Jury-Rigged devices are temporary, 
made to solve a problem here and now – but not 
to last. Normally, your device will only last for one 
action or use, then it will fall apart (the Gear Bonus 
automatically drops to zero). You can use a stunt 
to make it last longer (below).
Stunts: For every extra / you roll beyond the first, 
you get to choose one stunt. Some examples:
 K The device is durable and can be used more 
than once. It breaks down according to the 
normal gear rules (page 46).
 K The device’s Gear Bonus is increased by one.
 K If it’s a weapon, its weapon damage is in-
creased by one.
 K A gun gets an extra barrel and can be fired a 
second time before you need to reload. You 
can choose this stunt several times for a 
multi-barrel gun.
 K The Armor/Protection Rating of an armor 
or a Rot suit is increased by one. You can 
choose this stunt multiple times.
 K The Blast Power of an explosive charge 
is increased by 3. You can choose this 
stunt multiple times.
 K You fit deadly shrapnel to an explosive 
charge, increasing the weapon damage to 
2 (page 94).
 K A scrap raft can carry twice as 
many people.
Repairs:  You can do more than just build things 
– you can also fix things that are broken. With a 
successful Jury-Rig roll and few hours work you can 
repair an object with reduced Gear Bonus. If you 
succeed, the Gear Bonus is completely restored. If 
you fail, the Gear Bonus is permanently reduced to 
the current value. You can repair an object whose 
Gear Bonus has been reduced to zero – but if you 
fail the roll, the object is permanently destroyed.



--- PAGE 58

03
5 6
Player’s Section
THE STALKER’S SKILL:  
FIND THE PATH (AGILITY)
Any fool can walk into the Zone. But if you don’t 
know what you’re doing you’ll soon end up a corpse, 
bones gnawed clean by the beasts of the wasteland. 
Stalkers are a special breed, loners who went into 
the Zone and came to know it even as kids. Other 
mutants in the Ark look at you sideways, fearing 
you will spread the Rot or just distrust you for be-
ing different.
Roll for Find the Path when you go into a new 
sector of the Zone. Read more about Zone travels 
in Chapter 8 and, for the GM, in Chapter 13.
Failure: Any NPCs or monsters in the sector spot 
you before you spot them, and if hostile, they might 
ambush you (page 56).
Success: You find a safe path and spot any threats 
in the Zone before they spot you.
Stunts: For every extra / you roll beyond the first, 
you get to choose one stunt. Each stunt can only 
be chosen once per roll:
 K You find an artifact in the sector, if it’s there 
to be found. You still might have to struggle 
to get your hands on it.
 K You can assess the general level of Rot in the 
sector (page 125).
 K You find D6 bullets, still live.
 K You find D6 rations of grub contaminated by 
the Rot. It can be edible plants or leftovers 
from the Old Age. A Zone cook (page 67) can 
cook the Rot out of the food.
 K You find D6 rations of Rot-free water (rotwa-
ter is usually plentiful).
 K The exploration of the sector only takes half 
the time (page 122).
 K You rush through the sector in a quarter of 
the time it would take to explore it. You avoid 
all threats, but the sector does not count as 
having been explored and you find no arti-
facts, grub or water in it.
Vehicles: Some Gearheads have a special passion 
for cars, motorcycles and other vehicles from the 
Old Age. Their biggest dream is to find a vehicle, 
repair it, and rework it into a proper Zone ride. How 
vehicles work is explained in Chapter 6.
If you find a vehicle in decent shape, you can 
repair it with a successful Jury-Rig roll. With a sec-
ond, separate roll, you can custom build the vehicle 
in a number of ways. For every /, choose one stunt 
below. Each of these stunts be chosen several ti

--- PAGE 59

03
5 7
Skills
Keep Looking:  You usually only roll to explore sec-
tors that you haven’t explored before. An explored 
sector should be considered empty, and contains no 
threats unless the GM decides otherwise. You can 
roll for Find a Path to find artifacts, grub and water 
in a sector that has already been explored, however 
– as long as you haven’t already chosen these stunts. 
Each new roll takes as long as exploring the sector 
did in the first place.
Multiple Stalkers: If your group has several Stalk-
ers, only one of you get to roll to Find a Path when 
you enter a sector. Which one is up to you. If you 
later roll to find grub, water and artifacts you can 
all roll individually.
THE FIXER’S SKILL:  
MAKE A DEAL (EMPATHY)
Hunger, strife and conflict – your livelihood. Earlier, 
when there was plenty of grub and the Elder looked 
after you like you were his own children, you were 
a weak nobody. Now, you have found good use for 
your talent of seeing people’s needs and fulfilling 
them – for a price. You have dirt on almost everyone 
in the Ark, and there is hardly anything you can’t 
get your hands on.
The most common use of the Make a Deal skill 
is to find a contact to get you something you need 
– be it grub, water, gear or a particular favor.
Failure: You get stonewalled and nobody wants to 
deal with you. Or worse, you step on somebody’s 
toes and now you’re looking over your shoulder…
Success:  You know who probably has what you 
need. If he wants to give it to you is another matter 
entirely – you need to roleplay this out. Often you’ll 
need to Manipulate someone to get what you want.
Deals on the Side: There is second way to use the 
Make a Deal skill. You can do business on the side, 
whenever you have a few hours to spare in the Ark. 
You can only roll once per session. First, choose 
what you’re trading in and with whom:



--- PAGE 60

03
5 8
Player’s Section
 K Deal in grub – where’s it from, and who’s the 
buyer?
 K Deal in water – what’s the source, and who’s 
the buyer?
 K Deal in scrap – who’s the supplier, and who’s 
the buyer?
 K Deal in booze – who distills it and who’s the 
buyer?
 K Act as a courier or negotiator between rival 
Bosses.
 K Guard something or someone. What, who and 
why?
 K Steal something. What, from whom, and who 
want’s it?
Answer the above questions with help from the GM. 
Then, roll to Make a Deal. If you fail, someone ends 
up feeling cheated by you and you could be in a 
world of hurt. If you succeed, choose one option for 
every / you roll:
 K You gain D6 bullets.
 K You gain D6 rations of grub.
 K You gain 2D6 rations of Rot-free water.
 K You gain 2D6 doses of booze.
 K You get dirt on someone. The GM decides on 
who, and what the information is, but you are 
free to make suggestions.
Deals on the side can be handled summarily, just 
roll the dice and move – as long as you make your 
roll. If you fail, the consequences could be painful 
and should be played out in more detail.
THE DOG HANDLER’S SKILL: 
SIC A DOG (AGILITY)
Your dog is worth more to you than any mutant in 
the Ark. The bond between you is almost telepathic. 
You instinctively know what the animal wants, and 
the dog can always read your state of mind and 
defends you against any threat.
Stats: This skill works a little differently. Skill level 
1 means you have a dog that follows your every lead. 
The dog has Strength 4 and Agility 6. You can use 
the dog in several different ways:
Fighting:  Your dog can Fight for you. Use your skill 
level in Sic a Dog, and the dog’s Strength. You can 
push the roll (risking damage to the dog), but it 
won’t give you any Mutation Points.
To Sic a Dog on you enemy counts as an action, 
meaning you cannot perform any other action in 
the same turn. You can perform a maneuver in the 
same turn, however.
Scouting:  The dog can Scout for you. Use your skill 
level in Sic a Dog and your Wits score (the dog 
doesn’t have Wits). You can push the roll normally.



--- PAGE 61

03
5 9
Skills
Tracking:  Your dog can track a person or a creature, 
even when there are no obvious tracks to follow. All 
you need is a fresh scent or some object that has 
been in possession of the prey recently. Roll to Sic 
a Dog, using your Wits score. If successful, your 
dog picks up the trail and can indicate in which 
direction the prey has gone. For every extra / you 
roll, choose one stunt:
 K How far behind (in hours) are you?
 K Is the prey wounded?
 K Is the prey alone?
Damage: An enemy can choose whether to attack 
you or your dog. The dog suffers and recovers dam-
age just like a mutant. If the dog’s Strength reaches 
zero it dies – something you’ll surely make your 
opponent pay dearly for!
Finding a new mutt in the Ark isn’t hard – it 
takes a few days and a successful Sic a Dig roll to 
tame a new one. A failed roll will result in a fight. 
Out in the Zone, wild dogs are less common.
Grub and Water:  Your dog is a survivor, eating 
garbage and drinking rotwater. You don’t need to 
supply its daily grub and water – but you do need 
to give it extra grub or water to recover its trauma 
(page 90).
Sympathy:  Your dog gives you all the sympathy 
you need to recover lost Empathy. You don’t need 
the company of another mutant (page 90).
E X A M P L E
Jony wants to Fight the Stalker Yassan and Sics his 
dog on him. Jony uses his skill level in Sic a Dog (3) 
and the dog’s Strength score (4), meaning he rolls 
three Skill Dice and four Base Dice. Yassan is hurt 
but fires back and hits the dog with his scrap gun, 
causing two points of damage. The dog loses two 
points of Strength and Jony can feel his rage rising…
THE CHRONICLER’S SKILL: 
INSPIRE (EMPATHY)
Your mission in life is to witness and record the 
People’s fate in the dawnworld – but also to in-
terfere when needed. When other mutants lose 
their resolve you can help them find their cour-
age again – and when they stray from the right 
path, you can guide them back. Roll for Inspire 
when you wish to help or hinder another person 
rolling for a skill.
Help:  When using this skill, you can give all of your 
rolled / to the person you are helping. It counts as 
if he had rolled them himself, 

--- PAGE 62

03
6 0
Player’s Section
Literate: Most of the Ark’s inhabitants can’t read 
or write, at least not as long the Culture DEV level 
is low (page 101). Chroniclers are different – duti-
fully, you have maintained the knowledge of let-
ters, words and numbers, taught to you by the Elder 
when you were children.
E X A M P L E
Krin is climbing up into a tall ruined building in the 
Zone, and must roll to Move. The Chronicler Silas 
Inspires her. He rolls five Basic Dice (Empathy 5) 
and three skill dice (skill level 3 in Inspire), and gets 
one /. That’s very good news for Krin, who doesn’t 
roll any / herself. With the encouragement from 
Silas, she makes the climb.
A little later, Krin wants to Shoot an attacking 
Zone-Ghoul. Silas wants to stop her believing the 
conflict can be resolved without shedding blood. He 
rolls for Inspire, and gets one /. Now, Krin must roll 
at least two / to hit the ghoul.
THE BOSS’S SKILL:  
COMMAND (WITS)
As a Boss, you are never alone. You always have your 
gang of mutants nearby, ready to rush to your aid. 
Command works a little differently from other skills.
Size:  Your skill level is an indicator of how large 
your gang is – every level represents about 3–4 
members.
Stats: A basic gang mostly consists of Enforcers, 
and maybe a Dog Handler and a Fixer. The gang 
members will have typical NPC stats for their roles 
– see Chapter 9. You can improve their stats with 
talents (Chapter 4). Try to give all of your gang 
members roles and names.
Weapons:  Your basic gang is armed with clubs and 
other improvised melee weapons. Their weaponry 
can also be improved with the Armed Gang talent.
Grub, Water and Bullets:  As long as you are in the 
Ark, your gang members have enough grub and 
water to survive. If they have guns, they also have 
just enough bullets. Out in the Zone, it’s another 
matter – there, you have to provide food, water and 
bullets for your gang members.
Command:  Your gang members are all NPCs, under 
the GM’s control. But you can order them around 
– all of them or some of them – with the Command 
skill. Your roll is modified according to the task you 



--- PAGE 63

03
6 1
Skills
want done the table below, and any other factors 
the GM finds relevant.
Failure:  If your Command roll fails, someone in 
your gang rebels against you! You’ll need to fight 
him one-on-one, to make an example of what hap-
pens to anyone who questions your leadership. If 
you lose this fight (and live), your gang abandons 
you. You can find a new gang, but it will take some 
weeks and a successful Command roll. This process 
should be at least partly roleplayed out.
Success: If the Command roll succeeds, your gang 
(or the individual members given the order) per-
forms the task you want. If any of the factors in 
the table change during the task, you’ll need to roll 
again.
Racketeering: Bosses thrive on the fear of others. 
You can use the Command skill to demand bullets, 
grub and other resources from people in the Ark. 
Decide who your target is, and roll to Command. It 
takes a few hours, and you can only roll once per 
session. For every / you roll, choose what you get 
from the list below.
 K D6 bullets.
 K D6 rations of grub.
 K 2D6 rations of Rot-free water.
 K 2D6 rations of booze.
You can play out the encounter, or handle it sum-
marily with a dice roll. You don’t even have to go 
yourself, you can send you gang to do your dirty 
work for you (in this case, use the modifications 
table above). If the racketeering Command roll fails, 
something goes wrong. Maybe someone refuses 
to pay up and attacks you, maybe your gang runs 
into henchmen of another Boss. Details are up to 
the GM.
Projects: You can order your gang to work on the 
People’s projects instead of doing the hard labor 
yourself. Roll to Command instead of the skill listed 
for the project. Read more about the projects in the 
Ark in Chapter 7.
THE SLAVE’S SKILL:  
SHAKE IT OFF (STRENGTH)
It’s the Slave’s fate in life to endure pain and suf-
fering. As a Slave, you have learnt to shake off the 
abuse – whether physical or psychological. You 
can shut out the outside world and let the pain 
fade away. Roll for Shake it Off any time you suf-
fer trauma, of any kind (page 88). You can’t use 
the skill against trauma suffered when you push 
a dice roll.
Failure:  The pain is just

--- PAGE 64





--- PAGE 65

04
6 3
Talents
04
Talents
To get a much needed edge in a world fallen into 
ruins you must find your own niche, something you 
and no one else can do. Such special abilities are 
called talents. Talents can affect how you use skills 
or how you recover from trauma, or even let you do 
things that are quite simply impossible to others.
STARTING TALENTS
You can choose one talent for your PC at the start of 
the game. Your role decides which you can choose 
from – see the role descriptions on pages 26–41.
NEW TALENTS
You can learn new talents by earning Experience 
Points (page 25). When you have earned five XP, 
you can trade them in for a new talent. When this 
happens, you can either choose one more from the 
three available from the start, or you can pick one 
from a set of general talents that are available for 
everyone.
Only Once:  As a general rule, you can only choose 
each talent once, but there are some exceptions. Al-
ways write down new talents that you learn on your 
character sheet.
E X A M P L E
Krin has earned five XP and can learn a new talent. 
She picks Flyweight, that gives her an edge in close 
combat despite her low Strength score.
THE ENFORCER’S TALENTS
KK BARGE THROUGH
You can Move using Strength instead of Agility.
KK MEAN STREAK
When you Intimidate someone and give your victim 
doubt, he suffers one extra point of it.
KK SUCKER PUNCH
The weapon damage of your unarmed attacks is 2 
instead of 1.
THE GEARHEAD’S TALENTS
KK INVENTOR
You get a +2 modification when you use Jury-Rig to 
create a new device (page 54) – but not when you 
repair something.
KK MOTORHEAD
You get a +1 modification when you use a vehicle to 
ram someone (Fight) or to escape from a conflict 
(Move). You also get a +1 when you Jury-Rig to re-
pair or modify a vehicle (page 56).



--- PAGE 66

04
6 4
Player’s Section
KK TINKERER
You get a +2 modification when you Jury-Rig to 
repair a piece of gear – but not when you build 
something new.
THE STALKER’S TALENTS
KK MONSTER HUNTER
You get a +2 modification when you Scout a beast 
of any kind. 
KK ROT FINDER
When using Find a Path you have access to a new 
stunt that you can choose when you roll extra / – 
to find the most Rot-free route through the sector. 
The Rot level counts as one step lower during this 
visit to the sector.
KK SCAVENGER
You get a +2 modification to Find a Path – with suc-
cess you find any artifacts that may exist in a sector. 
To identify threats, you must instead get stunts. You 
can choose whether or not to use this talent when 
you enter a new sector.
THE FIXER’S TALENTS
KK JUICY INFO
Choose one important NPC of whom you have in-
criminating information. Decide the nature of this 
information together with the GM. Don’t overuse 
this hold over the NPC – it could come back to 
haunt you…
KK VICIOUS CREEP
When you Manipulate someone and give him doubt, 
he suffers one extra point of it.
KK WHEELER DEALER
When you use the Make a Deal skill to make small 
business on the side (page 57), you earn twice as 
much of the commodity you choose.
THE DOG HANDLER’S TALENTS
KK BLOODHOUND
You have trained your dog to be a skilled tracker. 
You get a +2 modification when you use your dog 
to follow a track (page 59). If the dog dies, you lose 
this talent.
KK FIGHT DOG
You have trained your dog to be a deadly little mon-
ster. You get a +2 modification when you use the 
dog to Fight (page 58). If the dog dies, you lose 
this talent.
BONESAW



--- PAGE 67

04
6 5
Talents
KK MUTANT’S BEST FRIEND
Your dog can get you out of any trouble. It can help 
you Endure and Move. Use your Sic a Dog skill level 
instead of these skills, and the dog’s attribute scores 
– Strength and Agility, respectively. You can push 
the rolls normally. Any trauma is suffered by your 
dog instead of you, but you don’t get any Mutation 
Points. If the dog dies, you lose this talent.
THE CHRONICLER’S TALENTS
KK AGITATOR
You get a +2 modification when you Inspire some-
one to Fight or Shoot.
KK BONESAW
You have learned the art of sawing bones and sew-
ing skin – all in the interest of saving lives, of course. 
You get a +2 modification when you roll to Heal a 
critical injury (page 90), but not when tending to 
someone who is broken by trauma.
KK PERFORMER
Once per session, if you’re in the Ark, you can 
perform for the People. You can tell a story by a 
trashcan fire, recite poetry or sing a song. Roll to 
Inspire. Every / gives you D6 bullets or rations 
of grub. A failed roll means someone doesn’t ap-
preciate your art…
THE BOSS’S TALENTS
KK COMMANDER
You get a +2 modification when you order your gang 
to fight for you. You don’t get the modification in 
any other situations, nor for racketeering.
KK GUNSLINGERS
The members of your gang all have scrap guns (pis-
tols or rifles). As long as they’re in the Ark, they 
have enough bullets to get by (but not more). In 
the Zone however, you have to supply the bullets.
KK RACKETEER
You get a +2 modification when you use the Com-
mand skill for racketeering in the Ark (page 61), 
but not for other uses.
THE SLAVE’S TALENTS
KK CYNIC
You get a +2 modification to Endure, but only when 
suffering doubt (and for no other kinds of trauma).
KK REBEL
When rolling to Endure, for every / you roll, you 
get a +1 modification to your next action. You must 
use this bonus at the earliest possible opportunity – 
that is, i the current turn or the next if you already 
acted in the turn.
KK RESILIENT
You get a +2 modification to Endure, but only when 
suffering damage (and for no other kinds of trauma).
GENERAL TALENTS
KK ADMIRER
One NPC is very impressed by you, and will do 
anything to help you or just to be ne

--- PAGE 68

04
6 6
Player’s Section
equal to the creature’s original Strength. It doesn’t 
work on swarms (page 176). The meat will usually 
be contaminated by the Rot. That means it’s a good 
idea to combine this talent with Zone Cook.
KK COMBAT VETERAN
You keep your cool under fire and can act effectively 
when your enemy hesitates. This means you get to 
add +2 to your initiative roll (page 79).
You can also use this talent to increase your 
initiative score by +2 during combat – but this will 
cost you a maneuver. You can do this as many times 
as you like during a conflict.
KK COOL HEAD
You can Move with Wits instead of Agility.
KK COUNSELOR
When you help someone, he gets an extra +1 modi-
fication – but only if he is doing something you 
told him to do.
KK COWARD
If someone Shoots at you and rolls a hit, you can 
take cover behind a friend at Arms Length or Near 
you. The friend has to accept taking a hit for you. 
Roll to Move. It doesn’t count as an action. If the 
roll is successful, the shot hits your friend instead 
of you.
KK FAST DRAW
You can draw your weapon so fast it doesn’t cost 
you a maneuver (page 80)
KK FLYWEIGHT
When you defend yourself in close combat (page 
84), you can use Agility instead of Strength.
KK GADGETEER
You get a +2 modification when you try to Compre-
hend an artifact from the Old Age.
KK GOOD FOOTWORK
You get a +2 modification when you defend in close 
combat (page 84).
KK HARD HITTER
You get a +2 modification to Fight if you sacrifice 
your maneuver in the turn. You can’t use the talent 
for parrying.
KK WORKHORSE
You get a +2 modification when you work on a 
project in the Ark (Chapter 7).
KK JACK OF ALL TRADES
You adopt a new role and immediately achieve skill 
level 1 in the specialist skill of that role. You keep 
your current skill level in the specialist skill of your 
old role, but you can no longer improve it. You also 
keep those of your talents that are specific to the 
old role, but you can’t get new talents tied to the 
role. It must make sense in the story for you to get 
COUNSELOR



--- PAGE 69

04
6 7
Talents
the new role. For example, to become a Boss you 
need to find a gang that will follow you.
Limitation:  This talent requires more experience 
than others. You can’t get it until you have learned 
at least three other talents first.
KK LIGHT EATER
You need only to eat one ration of grub per day to 
avoid losing Strength.
KK LONER
You can recover lost Empathy (page 89) without 
the company of others – all you need is to be by 
yourself for a few hours.
KK NEVER SURRENDER
When you are broken by damage (your Strength 
hits zero), you can get back on your feet immedi-
ately, without anyone Healing you. Roll to Endure, 
but without Base Dice (your Strength being zero). 
For every / you roll, you get one point of Strength 
back can keep fighting a little while longer. You 
can’t push the roll. The talent has no effect against 
serious or critical injuries.
KK PACK MULE
You can carry twice as many objects as normal with-
out being encumbered (page 23).
KK PERSONAL ARITHMETIC
You can Sense Emotion with Wits instead of 
Empathy.
KK SHARPSHOOTER
When you Shoot someone and hit, the target suffers 
one extra point of damage – but only if you fire at 
Long or Distant range.
KK SLEEPLESS
You can recover lost Wits by several other means 
than sleeping (page 90):
 K Jury-Rig a device (page 54).
 K Enter an unexplored sector of the Zone.
 K Comprehend an artefact.
KK STOIC
You can Endure using Wits instead of Strength.
KK THERAPIST
You get a +2 modification when you Heal someone 
who is broken by doubt.
KK WEAPON SPECIALIST
You’re an expert at using a certain type of weapon 
– choose one from the weapon lists (page 86) or an 
artifact. When you use this weapon, you get a +2 
modification. You can choose this talent sev-
eral times, once for each weapon type. 
You can be a specialist at fighting 
unarmed or at using a “blunt ob-
ject” – there are plenty of 
those in the Zone.
KK ZONE COOK
You have mastered 
the art of cooking 
contaminated food 
from the Zone well enough 
to purge it from the Rot. 
You can also purify con-
taminated water. Roll to 
Know the Zone – every 
/ rolled purifies D6 ra-
tions of grub or water.
COMBAT VETERAN



--- PAGE 70





--- PAGE 71

05
6 9
Mutations
05
Mutations
Your mutations are your trump cards, superhuman 
and unstoppable powers wired into your very DNA. 
No one in the Ark – except maybe the Elder – knows 
their origin. Can the answer be found in the place 
of myth called Eden?
You get one mutation at the start of the game, 
and you can develop more later, during play. You 
don’t get to choose your mutations – they are ran-
dom, and you draw a Mutation Card or roll dice on 
the table below to determine which you get.
ACTIVATING MUTATIONS
When you activate a mutation, no one can stop you 
and you never risk failure. Most mutations have 
several effects – you must choose which one of 
them you want to use. To activate your mutation, 
you need a Mutation Point (MP) – or more than one, 
to increase the effect.
 K At the beginning of every game session, you 
get a number of MP equal to the number of 
mutations you have.
 K You can win more MP by pushing a dice roll 
(page 44).
 K You can save MP from one session to the next.
 K You can never have more than 10 MP.
Conflict: In a conflict (Chapter 6), activating a mu-
tation usually counts as an action. This is not true 
for reactive and enhancing effects, read more about 
those below.
MISFIRE
That you can’t fail when using a mutation doesn’t 
mean it’s without risk. Roll one Basic Die for each 
MP you use to activate the mutation. If you roll one 
or more =, the mutation misfires. It has its desired 
effect, but something else happens too. Roll one 
Basic Die to determine what:
=
Your mutant powers run amok, and you suffer one point of 
permanent trauma. You choose which attribute is affected. 
At the same time, you develop a new mutation.
2
You suffer the effect of the mutation, and take as much 
trauma as your target. If the mutation doesn’t cause 
trauma, you get disoriented instead and can’t act at all in 
the next turn.
3
The mutation consumes twice the amount of MP you 
intended to spend on it – without increasing the effect. You 
can’t drop below zero MP .
4 The mutation locks down after this use. You can’t use it 
again for the rest of the session.
5 The mutation changes your appearance in some way. You 
choose how. The effect is onl

--- PAGE 72

05
7 0
Player’s Section
Permanent Trauma  is truly permanent – your at-
tribute score is permanently reduced by one step. 
This means your body and mind will slowly degen-
erate, as you get more and more mutated. This is 
what it means to be a mutant.
New Mutations: When you manifest a new muta-
tion, just draw one new Mutation Card or roll once 
on the mutations table in this chapter. You can 
never have more than four mutations. Read more 
on page 25.
E X A M P L E
Naphta has the Flame Breather mutation and 
spends three MP to fry an enemy in a cascade of 
fire. She rolls three Basic Dice and gets one = – mis-
fire! She rolls one Basic Die and gets a 3, meaning 
she loses another three MP. She only had four MP 
to start with, meaning she’s now down to zero. Her 
target takes three points of damage from the attack.
REACTIVE EFFECTS
Some mutations have what’s called reactive effects. 
These are marked (R) on the Mutation Cards and in 
this chapter. In a conflict, you can activate a reac-
tive effect any time you want, and any number of 
times in a single turn. Activating a reactive effect 
does not count as an action or as a maneuver – all 
you need is MP to spend.
ENHANCING EFFECTS
Another type of mutation effect is the enhancing 
effect. These are marked (E). You activate an en-
hancing effect at the same time as you perform 
an action or a maneuver, to enhance it. Using an 
enhancing effect does not count as an action or a 
maneuver in itself.
When using an enhancing effect with a skill 
roll, roll for the mutation first and then for the skill.
NPCs AND MUTATIONS
Mutations for NPCs are handled exactly as for PCs. 
A typical NPC mutant has one mutation, but there 
NPCs with more than one do exist. When the GM 
introduces a new mutant NPC she can draw Muta-
tion Card(s) or roll on the table to determine which 
mutation(s) he has – or simply pick something 
appropriate.
If the GM’s uses the cards to determine an 
NPC’s mutations, these should be shuffled back into 
the deck so that PCs and other NPCs can draw the 
same mutations later on.
Mutation Points:  Normally, an NPC enters the 
game with three MP. This is not an absolute rule 
– powerful mutants can have

--- PAGE 73

05
7 1
Mutations
AMPHIBIAN
Your body has inherited traits from fishes and rep-
tiles, making you equally at home under water as 
on land. With this mutation, you can:
 K Breathe underwater for a few minutes. Cost: 
1 MP. You swim quickly and smoothly like a 
fish.
 K Use your slippery scales to absorb damage 
from external attacks. Every MP spent elimi-
nates one point of damage. (R)
 K Bite an enemy at Arm’s Length with your 
numerous, small and very sharp teeth. It 
inflicts damage equal to the number of MP 
you spend.
CORPSE-EATER
Your metabolism is abnormally robust, as well as 
your jaws and teeth. You can:
 K Eat raw meat, even several days after the 
prey’s death, without suffering Rot Points 
(page 125). Small game counts as one ration 
of grub each. Bigger creatures – or human-
oids – count as two rations.
 K Bite a victim at Arm’s Length. The attack 
inflicts damage equal to the number of MP 
spent.
M UTATIONS  L IS T
D66 Mutation
11 Acid Spit
12 Amphibian
13 Corpse-Eater
14 Extreme Reflexes
15 Flame Breather
16 Four-Armed
21 Frog Legs
22 Human Magnet
23 Human Plant
24 Insectoid
25 Insect Wings
26 Luminescence
31 Manbeast
32 Mind Terror
33 Puppeteer
34 Parasite
35 Pathokinesis
36 Pyrokinesis
41 Reptilian
42 Rot-Eater
43 Sonar
44 Spores
45 Sprinter
46 Telepathy
51 Tracker
52–66 Re-roll
INSECTOID



--- PAGE 74

05
7 2
Player’s Section
EXTREME REFLEXES
You have superhuman reflexes, and you can:
 K Add +5 to your initiative roll at the beginning 
of a conflict. You can even use this effect to 
increase your initiative score by +5 during 
combat – but then it will cost you a maneuver.
 K Fight or Shoot an enemy several times in the 
same turn. Every extra attack costs you 1 MP. 
(E)
 K Dodge when someone Fights you, or Shoots 
at you. Every MP spent reduces the damage 
you take by one. You must activate the effect 
before you roll for armor (page 88). (R)
FLAME BREATHER
You can spew out flammable gases and ignite them 
on the way through your gullet to create a deadly 
cascade of fire. You can:
 K Set fire to a flammable object. Costs 1 MP.
 K Spew fire at an enemy at up to Near range. 
You inflict damage equal to the number of 
MP you spend.
 K Breath fire at a number of enemies equal 
to MP spent. Each one takes one point of 
damage.
FOUR-ARMED
You have four arms rather than two. You can:
 K Fight twice in a row, in the same turn. The 
extra attack costs you 1 MP and your maneu-
ver for the turn. (E)
 K Defend yourself against several close combat 
attacks in the same turn. Every defense after 
the first one costs you 1 MP. (E)
 K Climb with ease. You can spend 1 MP instead 
of rolling to Move when performing a difficult 
climb.
FROG LEGS
With your powerful, frog-like leg muscles you can 
perform superhuman leaps. You can:
 K Jump about 30' horizontally or 15' vertically. 
Costs 1 MP.
 K Leap on an enemy at up to Short range and 
immediately Fight them in the same turn. It 
will cost you 1 MP and your maneuver for the 
turn. (E)
 K Get out of a dangerous situation by jump-
ing to safety. Spend 1 MP instead of rolling 
H UMAN  M AGNET



--- PAGE 75

05
7 3
Mutations
to Move when you want to escape from a 
conflict.
HUMAN MAGNET
You have the ability to generate strong magnetic 
fields at will. You can:
 K Push away or attract metal objects within 
Short range, weighing no more than yourself. 
Costs 1 MP.
 K Throw metal objects at a target at up to Short 
range. The damage is equal to the number of 
MP you spend.
 K Shield yourself against bullets and other 
metal weapons. Every MP spent reduces the 
damage from such an attack by one. (R)
HUMAN PLANT
Your body has inherited traits from the plant world. 
You can:
 K Get nourishment from sunlight. Spend 1 MP 
instead of eating one ration of grub. Only 
works outdoors.
 K Your body is covered in sharp thorns that you 
can use in close combat. Inflicts one point of 
damage for every MP you spend.
 K Use your bark-like skin to absorb damage 
from external attacks. Every MP spent re-
duces the damage by one. (R)
INSECTOID
Your body has inherited traits from the insect world. 
You can:
 K Use your hardened skin to reduce damage 
taken from external attacks. Every MP spent 
reduces the damage taken by one. (R)
 K Climb a completely vertical surface for a few 
minutes, at the cost of 1 MP.
 K Quickly heal light wounds. Every MP spent 
heals one point of damage – even if you are 
broken. The mutation can’t heal serious or 
critical injuries.
INSECT WINGS
You have grown fly-like or butterfly-like wings on 
you back. You can:
 K Fly up to 100' – then you must land.
 K Fly up to an enemy at up to Short range and 
immediately Fight them in the same turn. It 
costs you 1 MP and your maneuver for the 
turn. (E)
 K Create an intense buzzing noise that drives 
people up the walls. A number of persons 
equal to MP spent suffer one point of doubt 
each.
INSECT  WINGS



--- PAGE 76

05
7 4
Player’s Section
LUMINESCENCE
Just like fireflies and certain types of fish, your body 
has a natural ability to emit light. You can:
 K Release a burst of light at a target at up to 
Near range. For every MP spent, the victim is 
completely blinded for one turn, and during 
this time suffers the effects of total darkness 
(page 93).
 K Light up an area around you, up to Short 
distance (about 100') for a few minutes. Costs 
1 MP.
 K Briefly bend the light around you, to obscure 
your presence. You can use this effect to es-
cape from a conflict without rolling to Move 
(page 81).
MANBEAST
You are half human, half savage beast. You can:
 K Attack one or more enemies at Arm’s Length 
with your fangs and your claws. They will 
take a total amount of damage equal to the 
number of MP spent.
 K Let rip a bestial roar. One enemy per MP 
spent, at up to Near range, suffers one point 
of doubt.
 K Never give up. When you are broken by 
damage or fatigue you can get up again and 
recover trauma points equal to MP spent. You 
will still suffer the effects of any critical inju-
ries (page 90).
MIND TERROR
Your brain has the ability to affect the minds of oth-
ers and create vivid hallucinations, at up to Near 
range. You can:
 K Torment your victim with visions that inflict 
confusion or doubt (your choice) equal to the 
number of MP spent.
 K Confuse others to make them miss their next 
action. Only works on humanoids. Costs 1 MP 
per victim.
 K Create an illusion so grand the victim will 
believe it to be real. Costs 2 MP.
PUPPETEER
By sheer force of will you can take control of other 
humanoid creatures and turn them into your pup-
pets. You can:
 K Decide what the victim’s next action is. 
Cost is 1 MP. You need to look the victim 
in the eyes, which is only possible at up to 
Near range. The victim rolls for the action 
M IND  T ERROR



--- PAGE 77

05
7 5
Mutations
normally. If you want him to use 
a mutation, you must spend the 
extra MP yourself. If you force the 
victim to hurt himself, he suffers 
weapon damage plus one for every 
MP spent.
PARASITE
You are a human parasite, capable of absorbing the 
life-force of other living humanoid beings at Arm’s 
Length. You can:
 K Steal one point of any attribute from the 
victim for every MP you spend. You cannot 
exceed your own maximum score. This effect 
does not heal serious or critical injuries, and 
has no effect on permanent trauma.
 K Steal a mutation from another mutant. Costs 
1 MP. You can use the mutation in the next 
turn – after that, the victim gets it back.
 K Heal another humanoid’s trauma. Every 
point to be healed costs 1 MP, and will 
inflict the same amount (and type) of 
trauma on you. You can even heal seri-
ous or critical injuries – this will cost 
you 2 and 4 MP, respectively, but not 
damage you.
PATHOKINESIS
You have the ability to affect the emotional state of 
others, at up to Near range. You can:
 K Instill fear or anxiety in others. Your victim 
suffers one point of doubt for every MP you 
spend.
 K Heal one point of doubt per MP spent. This 
effect requires you to touch your target. You 
can heal your own doubt.
 K Affect the mood of a group. You cannot con-
trol specific actions, only spread a general 
sense of anger, joy, sorrow, love or fear. This 
effect, which is roleplayed, lasts a few min-
utes. Costs 1 MP.
PYROKINESIS
You have the ability to set things on fire with pure 
force of will. You can:
 K Set fire to a flammable, inanimate object. 
Costs 1 MP.
 K Make a living being burst into flame, at up to 
Near range. Inflicts one point of damage per 
MP spent. Armor has no effect.
 K Melt ice or heat a cold area, eliminating the 
effects of severe cold (page 93) for one hour. 
Costs 1 MP.
P YROKINESIS



--- PAGE 78

05
7 6
Player’s Section
REPTILIAN
Your body has inherited traits from reptiles. You 
can:
 K Change the color and pattern of your skin, 
like a chameleon. You automatically succeed 
a Sneak roll, and attacks against you are 
performed as in total darkness (page 93). You 
need to be mostly naked. The effects last for a 
few minutes. Costs 1 MP.
 K Contort your body to push yourself through a 
hole or passage only a few inches wide. Costs 
1 MP.
 K Entrance a humanoid at up to Near range 
with your reptilian eyes. Your victim suffers 
one point of confusion per MP spent.
ROT-EATER
You are totally insensitive to the effects of the Rot. 
You take Rot Points normally (page 125), but you 
can:
 K Spend 1 MP to eliminate one point of trauma 
from the Rot. (R)
 K Spend 1 MP to use one of your Rot Points to 
recover one point of any attribute. You can’t 
use permanent Rot Points (page 126).
 K Emit concentrated Rot at an enemy at Arm’s 
Length. Inflicts one point of damage for every 
MP you spend. Each point also requires one 
point of Rot, which is consumed in the attack. 
You can’t use permanent Rot.
SONAR
By emitting a high frequency sound and listening 
to its echoes you can:
 K Sense your surroundings and effectively see in 
total darkness for a few minutes. Costs 1 MP.
 K Stun enemies at up to Short range. A number 
of victims equal to MP spent suffer one point 
of fatigue each.
 K Disrupt an enemy at up to Short range who is 
Shooting. Every MP you spend eliminates one 
/ he has rolled. (R)
SPORES
You have hidden spore sacs on your body, capable 
of spraying spore clouds against targets at up to 
Near distance. The spores can:
 K Make you victim’s eyes sting and his skin 
itch. For every MP spent your victim suffers 
one point of fatigue.
 K Stink so horribly that the victim chokes or 
suffers severe nausea. For every MP spent 
your target suffers one point of damage. Ar-
mor has no effect.
R EPTILIAN



--- PAGE 79

05
7 7
Mutations
 K Obscure you. Hidden in the cloud, you can 
escape from a conflict without rolling to 
Move. Costs 1 MP.
SPRINTER
Your leg muscles are extremely powerful, and you 
can run extremely fast over a short distance. You can:
 K Double your movement speed during one turn. 
Every maneuver you spend on movement 
counts as two (page 80). Costs 1 MP. (E)
 K Escape from a conflict without rolling to 
Move. Costs 1 MP.
TELEPATHY
By pure force of will you can read and affect the 
mind of other humanoid creatures, at up to Near 
range. You can:
 K For every MP you spend, get the answer to 
one of these questions: Is he lying? Is he 
hiding something? What is he thinking right 
now?
 K Plant a simple thought in your subject’s mind. 
He will think it is true. Costs 1 MP.
 K Create a mental short circuit to fry your vic-
tim’s brain. You inflict one point of confusion 
per MP spent.
TRACKER
Your sense of smell is extremely well developed. 
You can:
 K Follow the trail of a person or monster – like a 
bloodhound. Costs 1 MP per day.
 K Sense an enemy Sneaking up on you (page 
81). Every MP you use knocks out one / 
rolled by him. Costs 1 MP. 
 K Smell grub out in the Zone. Costs 1 MP and 
gives you D6 rations of Rot-contaminated 
grub.
T ELEPATHY



--- PAGE 80





--- PAGE 81

06
7 9
Conflict & Trauma
06
Conflict  
& Trauma
When someone gets in your way, you sometimes 
have no choice but to force him to move. Some of 
the skills described in Chapter 3 let you affect other 
people, via manipulation, threats or physical force. 
When someone wants to break you, and you want 
to break him just as bad, you have a conflict.
Conflicts can take a heavy toll on you character 
and could even kill him. Before entering a conflict, 
always ask yourself: Is it worth it?
TURNS & INITIATIVE
A conflict starts when you try to Manipulate, Shoot, 
Fight or Intimidate someone – or when someone 
does the same to you. Then it’s time to roll initia-
tive. Roll initiative before you make any skill roll.
INITIATIVE ROLL
Roll a D6 each and add your respective current 
Agility scores. No skill is used and you can’t push 
the roll. The one who rolls highest, acts first. If it 
is a tie, leave it to chance (any unmodified die roll, 
keep rolling until the tie is broken).
When both of you have acted the turn is over, 
and a new turn starts. The order of initiative is set 
for the entire conflict – you only roll initiative in 
the first turn.
Mutations & Talents: The Extreme Reflexes muta-
tion and the Combat Veteran talent can affect your 
initiative roll.
Time: In the game, a turn can represent between 
ten seconds and several minutes, depending on 
circumstances and the skills used.
MORE COMBATTANTS
If you’re lucky, you have friends on your side in the 
conflict. If you’re unlucky, your enemy has company 
too. Anyone who wants to join the conflict rolls for 
initiative at the beginning of the first turn. Your 
results create a turn order, that you will follow for 
the entire conflict. Write down your initiative scores, 
so that you don’t forget. Break ties using any ran-
dom die roll.



--- PAGE 82

06
8 0
Player’s Section
NPC Groups:  For groups of NPCs with identical 
stats, the GM only needs to roll one initiative roll 
for the entire group. These NPCs act at the same 
point in the turn order. The order in which these 
NPCs act is up to the GM.
CHANGING THE INITIATIVE
You never reroll your initiative during a conflict, but 
there are a few ways that you can increase your ini-
tiative scores – and thus change your position in the 
turn order for the next turn and onwards. You could:
 K Use the Extreme Reflexes mutation  
(page 72).
 K Use stunts when you Fight or Shoot  
(page 83).
E X A M P L E
Krin, Naphta, Marl and Silas are passing through 
an old abandoned amusement park when four Zone-
Ghouls attack. Everyone rolls initiative – current 
Agility score plus D6. The GM rolls one joint roll for 
the Zone-Ghouls. Krin gets 10, the GM 8, Naphta 
4, Marl 5 and Silas 6. The turn order is thus Krin – 
Zone-Ghouls – Silas – Marl – Naphta.
ACTIONS & MANEUVERS
When it’s your turn, you are allowed to perform one 
action and one maneuver , or two maneuvers . An 
action can be to:
 K Roll for a skill.
 K Activate a mutation (unless reactive or 
enhancing).
A maneuver can be to:
 K Move one range step (below).
 K Seek cover (page 89).
 K Get an item from your gear.
 K Pick up an item from the ground.
 K Draw a weapon.
 K Aim with a gun (page 85).
 K Reload a gun (page 85).
 K Use an item.
IN A TURN YOU CAN:
 K Perform an action and a maneuver
…or…
 K Perform two maneuvers.
HELPING & HINDERING
If you help or hinder another person (page 48), this 
takes the place of your own action that turn. You 
can, however, perform a maneuver while helping 
or hindering.
MUTATIONS
Activating a mutation normally counts as an ac-
tion. This means you cannot, as a rule, activate a 
mutation and use a skill in the same turn. Some 
mutations break this rule – those with reactive or 
enhancing effects. This is explained on page 70 in 
Chapter 5.
RANGE & MOVEMENT
In a conflict, the distance between you and your 
enemy is expressed in range categories:
 K Arm’s Length: Just next to each other.
 K Near: A few steps away.
 K Short: Up to 20–30 yards.
 K Long: Up to a few hundred yards.
 K

--- PAGE 83

06
8 1
Conflict & Trauma
takes one  maneuver. For any movement beyond 
Short distance, you need two maneuvers in direct 
succession in the same turn to move one range 
category – meaning you can’t perform an action 
in the same turn.
Mutations and vehicles can help you move 
faster than normal.
M OVEMENT
b etween a n D r eq uire S
Arm’s Length Near One maneuver
Near Short One maneuver
Short Long Two maneuvers
FLEEING THE CONFLICT
If you’re losing a fight, it’s often better to run away, 
and survive, than to stay and fight to death. If you 
want to get out of a conflict, roll to Move – a suc-
cessful roll means you have found some way out, 
and the conflict is over. However, you can’t use the 
flee roll to move past an enemy blocking your way 
– you can only flee back the way you came from.
The GM can modify your roll depending on how 
hard the terrain is to hide in. The distance to your 
closest enemy also matters – see the table below.
FLEEING CONFLICT
D i S tance M o D if ication
Arm’s Length −2
Near −1
Short ±0
Long +1
Distant No roll needed
Note that you only need one successful roll to get out 
of harm’s way, and leave the conflict. Also note that 
you don’t need to roll at all if you’re at Distant range.
If your roll fails it means that you are pinned 
down and unable to get away for the moment – you 
remain at the same range. The GM can let some 
other misfortune happen to you as well. You can 
try to flee again next turn.
E X A M P L E
The distance between the PCs and the Zone-Ghouls 
is Short. To reach the enemies in the first turn of 
conflict, Marl must use two maneuvers. In the next 
turn, Marl can attack them in close combat. If he 
had had a scrap spear (that can be used at Near 
range) he could have attacked them in the first turn.
Naphta wants to escape from the conflict, which 
means she must roll to Move. Since the distance is 
Short, she gets no modification to the roll.
OTHER TYPES OF MOVEMENT
There are of course other types of movement in con-
flict besides advancing, retreating and fleeing. For 
these, the GM assesses the situation and what you 
are trying to accomplish. To run a short distance to 
seek cover, for example, only requires a 

--- PAGE 84

06
8 2
Player’s Section
Surprise:  If you attack in a way that the GM deems 
likely to surprise your enemy, you get to add +3 to 
your initiative roll.
Sneak Attack: When you stalk someone and your 
attack catches them unawares, it’s called a sneak 
attack. First, roll to Sneak. You get a modification 
according to how close you go, see the table below. 
To attack in close combat, you’ll most often need 
to get within Arm’s Length. If you fail, your target 
spots you at your starting distance – roll initiative. If 
you succeed, you get a free action  (but not a maneu-
ver) before you roll initiative.
If several people attempt to sneak attack to-
gether, all must make separate rolls for the sneak 
attack to work. If anyone fails, the attackers are 
spotted.
Ambush: A special kind of sneak attack is the am-
bush  – you lie in wait for your enemy and attack 
when he passes. When you ambush someone, roll 
to Sneak modified for the distance to your target. 
You automatically get a +2 modification because 
you are still and the enemy moves.
Tracker:  Note that the Tracker mutation can be 
used to notice sneaks attacks and ambushes.
SNEAK ATTACK
D i S tance M o D if ication
Arm’s Length −2
Near −1
Short ±0
Long +1
Distant +2
SOCIAL CONFLICTS
For non-violent conflicts you use the Manipulate 
skill (page 53). The Enforcer can also Intimidate 
(page 54).
BARGAINING POSITION
To be able to Manipulate or Intimidate someone, 
you need:
 K Your subject must be able to hear and under-
stand you.
 K What you want must be something that isn’t 
completely unreasonable.
If the GM thinks both of these conditions are met, 
she will determine your bargaining position and 
give you a modification based on it.
Each of the following factors gives you a +1 
modification:
 K You have more people on your side.
 K What you ask for doesn’t cost your opponent 
anything.
COMBAT MAPS
Generally, you don’t need a detailed map 
of the battlefield. The GM sets the scene 
by pointing out a few main features, and 
you’re all ready to go. However, if you 
prefer to play the combat out in detail 
on a combat map, you can do so – even 
using appropriate miniatures if you want 
to. Use a map grid, where 

--- PAGE 85

06
8 3
Conflict & Trauma
 K The opponent has suffered trauma.
 K You have helped your opponent earlier.
 K You plead your case very well (GM’s 
judgement).
Each of the following factors give you a −1 
modification:
 K Your opponent has more people on his side.
 K What you ask for is valuable, or dangerous.
 K Your opponent has nothing to gain by help-
ing you.
 K You have difficulties understanding each 
other.
 K The range between you is Short or longer.
GROUPS IN SOCIAL CONFLICTS
When you want to Manipulate or Intimidate a 
group of people, it is normally the group’s leader 
or spokesperson that is the object of your skill roll. 
Remember that you get a −1 modification if he has 
more people behind him. If you push the leader in 
your preferred direction, the other NPCs will gen-
erally follow. If there is no clear leader in a group 
of NPCs, you’ll need to Manipulate or Intimidate 
them separately.
GEAR
Some gear – most often artifacts – can provide 
a Gear Bonus to your attempts to Manipulate or 
Intimidate.
E X A M P L E
Silas tries to Manipulate the leader of the Zone-
Ghouls. The GM determines his bargaining position 
to be bad – in the middle of the shootout the Zone-
Ghouls have trouble hearing him, they don’t know 
his language very well, and they have no obvious 
benefit from listening to him. The GM gives Silas 
a −3 modification.
EFFECTS
When you successfully Manipulate someone this 
usually means that they do what you want – but 
only if you give them something in return. They de-
cide what it is they want, but it must be something 
that you can reasonably accomplish. It is up to you 
whether to accept the deal or not.
If you successfully use the Intimidate skill 
(page 54), your opponent must either do what you 
want or to attack you immediately (by Fighting, 
Shooting or using a mutation).
Stunts:  Extra / on your roll mean you sow fear 
or doubt in your opponent’s heart. He suffers one 
point of doubt (page 88) for every additional / you 
roll over and above the first one. If he is broken by 
doubt, he does what you want without demanding 
a return favor (or getting the option to attack you, 
in the case of Intimidate).
CLOSE COMBAT
When you at

--- PAGE 86

06
8 4
Player’s Section
ing a conflict, picking up a dropped object 
counts as a maneuver (page 80).
 K Your opponent falls to the ground or is 
pushed back, for example through a doorway 
or over a cliff.
 K You hold the opponent in a grapple. He 
needs to successfully Fight you to break free 
(below).
DEFENSE
When someone Fights you, you can try to defend 
yourself. When you defend, you also roll for Fight. 
Roll your dice at the same time as the attacker. For 
each / you roll, choose one stunt:
 K You eliminate one / rolled by the attacker. If 
he has no / left, his attack has no effect on 
you.
 K You increase your initiative score by 2 (page 
80), taking effect next turn.
 K You knock or pull a weapon or other object 
from your opponent.
 K Your opponent falls to the ground or is 
pushed back, for example through a doorway 
or over a cliff.
 K You tire your enemy. He suffers one point of 
fatigue.
 K You counter-attack against your enemy and 
inflict weapon damage. You cannot increase 
this damage by using several /.
Note that you can choose to make a counter-attack 
instead of stopping your opponent’s attack. That 
means you may hit each other simultaneously.
Limitations:  There are several limitations to the 
defense move:
 K You must declare that you defend before the 
attacker rolls his dice. If he misses anyway, 
your defense is wasted.
 K If you defend, you lose your next action – in 
this turn if you haven’t acted yet, otherwise 
in the next turn. You do keep your maneuver, 
however.
 K You can only defend yourself against one at-
tack per turn. If you defend and get attacked 
again in the same turn, you can’t defend 
again.
 K If the attacker uses a close combat weapon of 
some kind but you don’t, you get a −2 modifi-
cation to your defense roll.
GRAPPLING
As a stunt when you Fight someone, you can choose 
to grapple him. He then needs to successfully Fight 
you to break free. Until he has, he can’t perform any 
other action (or any maneuver) – or until you are 
broken or you choose to let him go.
While you grapple your opponent, the only 
actions you can perform are to Fight him or use 
mutations against him.
E X A M P L E
Marl lunges at a Zone-Gh

--- PAGE 87

06
8 5
Conflict & Trauma
MODIFICATION
The farther away your target is, the harder it is to 
hit. At Short range you get a −1 modification, and 
at Long range you get −2. At Arm’s Length you get 
−3, because it’s hard to aim at an enemy in close 
combat. You don’t get this modification if you fire 
at a defenseless or unwitting enemy.
RANGE MODIFICATION
D i S tance M o D if ication
Arm’s Length −3*
Near ±0
Short −1
Long −2
* Does not apply for defenseless enemies.
AIMING
Before you Shoot you can spend one maneuver to 
aim carefully. That gives you a +1 modification. If 
you also have some solid piece of cover to lean on, 
the bonus increases to +2. You must aim and fire 
in the same turn – you cannot save the bonus for 
a later turn.
RELOADING
Jury-Rigged firearms are normally loaded with one 
bullet at a time. Every time you have fired a shot you 
need to spend one maneuver to reload the weapon, 
until you can fire again. Bows and slingshots also 
need to be prepared with one maneuver before they 
can be fired.
Clip: Some artifact-guns have a clip that holds sev-
eral rounds, letting you fire again and again without 
reloading. You don’t need to keep track of how many 
bullets remain in the clip – just assume it lasts until 
the end of the combat.
Multiple barrels:  Some Jury-Rigged firearms (page 
54) and certain artifacts have two or more barrels, 
loaded with one bullet each. You can only fire one 
barrel at a time, but you don’t need to reload until 
both of the barrels have been discharged.
E X A M P L E
Krin has sought cover behind a car wreck and fires at 
a Zone-Ghoul. First, she aims carefully (one maneu-
ver) which gives her a +1 modification. In her next 
turn, she fires again. This time, she can’t get the aim 
bonus, because she needs to use her maneuver in 
the turn to reload.
EFFECTS
If your Shoot roll succeeds, you hit and your op-
ponent suffers weapon damage. For every extra / 
you roll, choose one stunt:
 K You inflict one more point of damage. You 
can choose this stunt multiple times, if you 
roll several /.
 K You pin down your enemy. He suffers one 
point of fatigue (page 88).
 K You increase your initiative score by 2 (page 
80), effectiv

--- PAGE 88

06
8 6
Player’s Section
E X A M P L E
Krin fires at a Zone-Ghoul again and gets two /. 
The scrap rifle has weapon damage 2. She chooses 
to spend her extra / to increase the damage, inflict-
ing a total of 3 damage points on the Zone-Ghoul.
FULL-AUTO FIRE
Some rare artifact weapons are capable of full auto-
matic fire. When firing full auto, roll as usual for the 
Shoot skill. You can push the roll normally – but it 
will cost you one extra bullet. You can then continue 
to push the roll, again and again. Every reroll costs 
you one bullet. As usual, you risk fatigue and the 
weapon risks being damaged every time you reroll. 
You can push the roll as many times as you want, 
until you run out of bullets or until you collapse or 
the weapon breaks.
Multiple targets:  When firing full auto, you can di-
rect a pushed roll – including the first one – against 
a different target. The first / you roll for a new 
target will inflict weapon damage on that target. 
Further / for the same target gives you stunts to 
use on that target.
E X A M P L E
The Gearhead Naphta has come across an 
ancient assault rifle. She opens fire at a Zone-
Ghoul and rolls two Base Dice (she has Agility 
2), two Skill Dice (she has Shoot skill level 2) and 
three Gear Dice (for the gun). On her first roll, she 
gets no /, but a Gear Die shows  
 . Naphta pushes 
the roll, knowing this will damage the weapon. She 
uses up another bullet and rerolls six dice (all ex-
cept the one showing 
 . Now she rolls two / and 
no = or 
 . The Zone-Ghoul is hit and collapses to 
the ground.
But Naphta keeps shooting. She fires at another 
Zone-Ghoul, pushing the roll again. She uses up an-
other bullet and rerolls the four dice now showing 
neither / nor 
 . She rolls another /, hitting the 
second Zone-Ghoul too. She still has three dice to 
push, but chooses not to. Two enemies are hit, but 
Naphta has spent three bullets and the Gear Bonus 
of the assault rifle is reduced to +2. After combat, 
she can repair the weapon with a Jury-Rig roll and 
bring the Gear Bonus back up to +3.
WEAPONS
Weapons will make you more effective in close 
combat, and they are a requirement for any kind 
of ranged combat. B

--- PAGE 89

06
8 7
Conflict & Trauma
You can find better weapons from the Old Age out 
in the Zone – if you’re lucky.
Bonus indicates how many Gear Dice the weapons 
gives you to roll. Remember that the Gear Bonus 
can be reduced if you push your skills roll. If the 
Gear Bonus is reduced to zero, the weapon is broken 
and must be repaired by a Gearhead before it can 
be used again.
Damage  indicates how many points of damage your 
target will suffer if your attack succeeds. If you roll 
more than one /, you can deal extra damage.
Range  indicates the maximum range category 
(page 80) at which the weapon can be used.
Scrap weapons can be constructed by a Gearhead 
(page 55). The Bonus and Damage ratings for these 
indicated in the weapons table are just standard 
values – skilled and/ or lucky Gearheads can build 
weapons with higher scores. Scrap guns can also 
be constructed with multiple barrels, so that they 
can be fired repeatedly without reloading.
Light weapons  only take up half a line in the inven-
tory section of your character sheet.
Flamethrowers  require one dose of booze for every 
attack. Anyone hit catches fire and continues to burn 
and takes one more point of damage until he makes 
a Move roll. Every attempt counts as an action.
Scrap cannons  are heavy weapons, not easily 
moved by hand. Each attack requires an explosive 
charge with minimum Blast Power of 6.
Artifacts: Stats for weapons from the Old Age can 
be found on the Artifact Cards and they are col-
lected in a table on page 189 of this book.
CALIBER
In the basic game rules, we make no dis-
tinction between rounds of different types 
and calibers – any bullet can be used in 
any weapon, to keep things simple. If you 
like a little more realism, bullets can be 
divided into three types: pistol, rifle and 
shotgun. In this case, a Gearhead build-
ing a scrap gun must decide what type of 
ammunition it is made for. For artifacts, 
the type of bullet needed is self-evident.
R ANGED  WEAPONS
w ea P on b on u S Da M ag e r an ge c o MM en t
Thrown Rock — 1 Short
Slingshot +1 1 Short Jury-Rigged.
Bow +1 1 Long Jury-Rigged.
Scrap Pistol +1 2 Short Jury-Rigged.
Scrap Derringer +1 1 Near Jury-Rigged. Ligh

--- PAGE 90

06
8 8
Player’s Section
TRAUMA
There are four types of trauma in this game. Each 
type will decrease one of your four attributes. You 
indicate trauma that you suffer by using the check-
boxes on your character sheet.
Damage:  Bruises, bleeding wounds and broken 
bones. Decreases your Strength.
Fatigue:  Physical exhaustion, sweating and panting. 
Decreases your Agility.
Confusion: Lack of clarity, bewilderment and mis-
judgement. Decreases your Wits.
Doubt:  Lack of confidence, distrust, disappointment 
and sadness. Decreases your Empathy.
You can suffer trauma in several different ways:
 K From external attacks. When someone suc-
cessfully Fights you or Shoots at you, you 
suffer damage equal to the weapon damage 
– more if the attacker gets stunts and spends 
them on increasing the damage. You can 
suffer doubt when someone Manipulates or 
Intimidates you. Mutations can also give you 
trauma, of all types (see Chapter 5).
 K By rolling = when you push a die roll. You 
then suffer one point of trauma of the kind 
connected to the attribute you rolled for 
(above) for each = rolled. This is not only 
negative – you also get one Mutation Point 
for each point of trauma suffered in this way.
 K From exposure to the Rot (page 124), from de-
hydration, starvation and extreme cold (page 
92) and from explosions (page 94).
ARMOR & SHIELDS
To protect you from damage (not other types of 
trauma), Gearheads build armor from scrap – and 
if you’re lucky, you can find functional body armor 
from the Old Age out in the Zone.
The effect of armor is determined by the Armor 
Rating. You can only wear one type of armor at a 
time. When you suffer damage, roll a number of 
Gear Dice equal to the Armor Rating. For every / 
you roll, the damage you suffer is reduced by one. 
For every 
  you roll, the Armor Rating is decreased 
by one. The armor roll does not count as an action 
and cannot be pushed. Armor can be repaired by 
Gearheads (page 55).
Armor has no effect against damage from de-
hydration, starvation, hypothermia or from pushing 
dice rolls.
Shields:  Gearheads can also make shields from 
road signs, trash-can lids and other kinds of scrap. 
They work just like armor,

--- PAGE 91

06
8 9
Conflict & Trauma
COVER
When you enter a firefight, finding cover may save 
your life. Look for something solid, like a brick wall 
or a wrecked car. Taking cover counts as a maneu-
ver (page 80).
Cover has a Protection Rating and works exactly 
like armor (above) – but is only effective against 
ranged attacks. Cover is reduced by 
  results, just 
like armor. Cover can be combined with armor – roll 
for cover first, then for armor.
Aiming:  Cover can also be useful to rest your arms 
on when Shooting. The bonus for aiming carefully 
(page 85) increases to +2 when firing from cover.
T YPICAL  C OVER
c over t y P e Pr otection r at ing
Shrubbery 2
Furniture 3
Wooden Door 4
Car Door 5
Brick Wall 6
Sand Bag 7
E X A M P L E
Krin lies in cover behind the car wreck (Protection 
Rating 5). A shot hits her, inflicting one point of dam-
age. Krin rolls five Gear Dice for the cover. She gets 
one / and suffers no damage. In the next turn, she’s 
hit again. This time she rolls two 
  but no /. Krin 
is hurt and the Protection value of the car wreck is 
reduced to 3. Krin would do wisely to find new cover 
(costing her a maneuver if it’s nearby).
BROKEN
When an attribute score hits zero, you are broken. 
You’ve had enough and lack the will or ability to 
keep going. Exactly what it means to be broken 
depends on what attribute has been depleted.
Strength:  You’re knocked out, or in paralyzing pain. 
Being broken by damage is much more danger-
ous than by other types of trauma, because it also 
means you suffer a critical injury (below).
Agility: You’re physically exhausted.
Wits: Your brain is overloaded and you can’t think 
straight.
Empathy:  You break down in fear, self-pity or 
sorrow.
EFFECT
When broken, you cannot use any skills, perform ac-
tions or activate mutations (not even reactive ones). 
You can, however, perform one maneuver per turn 
(page 80).
GETTING BACK UP
The fastest way to recover from being broken is for 
someone else to successfully Heal you (page 53).
In most cases though, you don’t need  to be 
Healed to get back on your feet. As long as you’re 
not dehydrated, starving or hypothermic (below), 
you recover after D6 hours even if no one Hea

--- PAGE 92

06
9 0
Player’s Section
 K At least four hours rest.
 K A resource depending on the type of trauma.
When both these conditions are met, you restore all 
lost attribute points of the relevant type. You can 
even recover multiple types of trauma simultane-
ously, as long as you have access to the resources 
needed. These are:
 K Strength: A ration of grub.
 K Agility: A ration of water.
 K Wits: At least four hours of sleep.
 K Empathy: A moment of closeness with an-
other mutant. It can be a talk by the camp-
fire, a moment of shared silence, or physical 
contact.
The resources needed for recovery come on top of 
your daily needs of grub, water and sleep (below).
MUTATIONS
Some mutations let you recover trauma instantly. 
This requires no resources, only Mutation Points 
(see Chapter 5). However, mutations cannot nor-
mally heal critical injuries (below).
CRITICAL INJURIES
Being broken is always bad, but being broken by 
damage is especially dangerous – it can mean death.
Before you are broken, damage points repre-
sent bruises and minor cuts. Painful, but quickly 
recovered with some rest and a little grub to give 
you new energy (above). But when your Strength 
falls to zero, you suffer a critical injury.
Roll D66 on the table on page 91 to determine 
what your critical injury is. Note it on your char-
acter sheet.
DEATH
If your critical injury is listed as lethal , someone 
must make a successful Heal roll to save you – 
otherwise you die when the time period indicated 
has passed. If you get back up on your own accord 
(above) before you die, you can try to Heal yourself 
– but with a −2 modification to the roll. Each person 
trying to Heal you can only roll once.
Instant Kill: Note that there are two critical inju-
ries that kill you outright. If you roll either of these, 
that’s it. Time to reduce the Ark’s population by one 
and create a new mutant.
HEALING
Each critical injury has a specific effect that you 
suffer during the healing time indicated (measured 
in days).
Care: If someone rolls to Heal you during the proc-
ess of healing a critical injury, the remaining heal-
ing time is reduced by half. Any roll to save your 
life (above) does not count to

--- PAGE 93

06
9 1
Conflict & Trauma
C RITICAL  I N j UR IES  T AB LE
D66 i njury l et hal t i M e l i M it e ff ect During h ea ling h ea ling t i M e
11 Lost Breath No — None. —
12 Stunned No — None. —
13 Sprained Wrist No — −1 to Shoot and Fight. D6
14 Sprained Ankle No — −1 to Move and Sneak. D6
15 Concussion No — −1 to Scout and Comprehend. D6
16 Damaged Shin No — −1 to Move and Sneak. 2D6
21 Broken Nose No — −1 to Manipulate, +1 Intimidate, Tracker mutation 
disabled. 2D6
22 Broken Fingers No — −1 to Shoot and Fight. 2D6
23 Broken Toes No — −1 to Move and Sneak. 2D6
24 Teeth Knocked Out No — −1 to Manipulate, +1 Intimidate. 2D6
25 Groin Hit No — You suffer one point of damage for every roll you make 
to Force, Move or Fight. 2D6
26 Thigh Wound No — −2 to Move and Sneak. 2D6
31 Biceps Wound No — −2 to Shoot and Fight. 2D6
32 Severed Achilles 
Tendon No — −2 to Move and Sneak. 2D6
33 Dislocated Shoulder No — −3 to Force and Fight, can not use two-handed weapons. D6
34 Broken Ribs No — −2 to Move and Fight. 2D6
35 Broken Forearm No — Can not use two-handed weapons. 3D6
36 Broken Leg No — −2 to Move and Sneak. 3D6
41 Ear Torn Off No — −1 to Scout, Sonar mutation disabled. 3D6
42 Gouged Eye No — −2 to Shoot and Scout. 3D6
43 Punctured Lung Yes D6 days −2 to Endure and Move. 2D6
44 Damaged Kidney Yes D6 days You suffer one point of damage for every roll you make 
to Force, Move or Fight. 3D6
45 Crushed Knee Yes D6 days −2 to Move and Sneak. 4D6
46 Crushed Elbow Yes D6 days −2 to Force and Fight, can not use two-handed weapons. 4D6
51 Crushed Foot Yes D6 days −3 to Move and Sneak. 4D6
52 Bleeding Gut Yes D6 hours You suffer one point of damage for every roll you make 
to Force, Move or Fight. D6
53 Crushed Face Yes D6 hours −2 to Manipulate. 4D6
54 Busted Intestine Yes D6 hours You suffer one Rot Point per hour until Healed. 2D6
55 Damaged Spine No — Paralyzed from the waist down. Effect is permanent un-
less Healed during healing time. 4D6
56 Neck Injury No — Paralyzed from the neck down. Effect is permanent un-
less Healed during healing time. 4D6
61 Internal Bleeding Yes, −1 D6 minutes You suffer one point of damage for every roll you make 
to Force, Move or Fight. 2D6
6

--- PAGE 94

06
9 2
Player’s Section
After two hours of wandering, Marl finds his 
friends again. Silas gets to work and tries to Heal 
Marl. His roll fails. He pushes the roll, knowing 
Marl is probably a goner if he fails. He makes it, 
rolling one / but also two =. Marl lives, but Si-
las suffers two points of doubt from the harrowing 
experience.
Marl can now eat and rest to restore his Strength 
after a few hours, but the critical injury will stay 
for D6 days. Marls rolls a 4. For four days, Marl 
will suffer one point of damage every time he rolls 
to Force, Move or Fight. If Silas cares for him and 
makes another Heal roll, Marl’s critical injury will 
be gone in two days.
NON-TYPICAL DAMAGE
For some types of damage – for example from nox-
ious gases, acid, or fire – the critical damage table 
doesn’t work very well. If you are broken by a non-
typical kind of damage like this, don’t roll on the 
table – instead, use the line at the bottom named 
“Non-Typical Damage”.
PUSHED DAMAGE
There is one case where you don’t suffer any criti-
cal injury at all when broken by damage: When 
you push a Strength roll so hard that you break 
yourself (page 45). It’s very rare, but it can happen. 
This means you can never kill yourself by pushing 
a dice roll.
CONDITIONS
In the game, there are four conditions: starving, de-
hydrated, sleepless and hypothermic. These condi-
tions can cause trauma and block recovery.
STARVING
Every day, you must eat at least one ration of grub, 
on top of what is needed to recover lost Strength 
(above). After one day with no grub you are starving . 
Note this in the checkbox on your character sheet. 
Being starving has several effects:
 K You cannot recover damage (restore Strength) 
in any way. If broken by damage, you need 
to eat some grub before you can get back 
on your feet. You can recover other types of 
trauma.
 K You suffer one more point of damage per 
day without grub. If broken by damage while 
starving you will die after another day has 
passed, unless you are given grub.
 K As soon as you have eaten one ration of 
grub, you are no longer starving and you 
can recover normally. To recover all damage 
(above) you need to consume another

--- PAGE 95

06
9 3
Conflict & Trauma
SLEEPLESS
Every day, you must get at least four hours of contin-
uous sleep. After one day without enough sleep, you 
become sleepless . Note this in the checkbox on your 
character sheet. Being sleepless has several effects:
 K You cannot recover confusion (restore Wits) 
in any way. If broken by confusion, you need 
to sleep for four hours or more before you can 
get back on your feet. You can recover other 
types of trauma.
 K You suffer one more point of confusion per 
day without sleep. If broken by confusion 
while sleepless you will collapse and fall un-
conscious for four hours or more.
 K As soon as you have at least four hours of 
sleep, you are no longer sleepless and you 
can recover Wits normally. To recover all con-
fusion you need to sleep another four hours.
HYPOTHERMIC
In the Ark, you can warm yourselves by the trashcan 
fires or huddle up close to each other under old 
tarpaulin and cloth when the Zone cold is bitter. 
Out in the Zone, the cold can be a threat as deadly 
as the Rot.
When you are exposed to a cold environment, 
the GM can make you roll to Endure at regular in-
tervals. The colder it is, the more often you must 
roll. Around the freezing point, once per day or so 
is enough – in the deep atomic winter, you might 
need to roll every hour. Things that can keep you 
warm, like an old blanket or a jacket, can give you 
Gear Dice to use.
If the roll fails, you become hypothermic. This 
has several consequences:
 K You immediately suffer one point of damage 
and one point of confusion – the cold makes 
the blood flow more slowly to your brain.
 K You may experience strange hallucinations 
– the details are up to the GM. It is said that 
someone who is freezing to death will experi-
ence a burning heat, making them tear their 
clothes off in the final moments before dying.
 K You keep rolling to Endure at the same inter-
vals, with the same effect if you fail a roll. If 
broken by damage when hypothermic, you 
die the next time you are called upon to roll.
 K As long as you are hypothermic, you can-
not restore Strength or Wits. It is only once 
your are warm again, even if only heated by a 
meagre campfire, th

--- PAGE 96

06
9 4
Player’s Section
to make a Scout roll to get a good look at them. 
That roll does not count as an action in conflicts 
– you can Scout and attack in the same turn. You 
can’t Shoot at targets at Short range or more in 
total darkness.
EXPLOSIONS
In some parts of the Zone, the ground is covered by 
deep craters, traces of the Ancients’ mighty weap-
ons of mass destruction. Such weapons are rare now, 
if they exist at all, but Gearheads can Jury-Rig some 
pretty powerful explosive charges (page 54).
The force of an explosion is measured in Blast 
Power. When the detonation occurs, the GM – or the 
player whose PC built the bomb – rolls a number of 
Base Dice equal to the Blast Power for each person 
within Near range of the blast. For every / rolled, 
the victim suffers one point of damage. The roll 
cannot be pushed. Victims at Arm’s Length from 
the detonation suffer one extra point of damage.
Effect Radius:  Powerful charges, with a Blast Power 
of 7 or more, can harm people even at Short range. 
The Blast Power is then reduced by 6. If there are 
many people within Short range of the blast, the 
GM can simplify the process by rolling just one 
roll and apply the result to all victims.
Shrapnel: Normal explosions have a weapon 
damage of 1 – the damage is simply equal to 
the number of / rolled (except at Arm’s Length, 
where it is one more). A mean Gearhead 
can arm his bomb with small bits of scrap, like ball 
bearings or nails, to increase the effect. This is a 
stunt when using the Jury-Rig skill. If so armed, the 
Blast Power of the bomb is increased to 2.
Vehicles:  Explosions can harm vehicles (below). 
Roll for the damage to the vehicle as it was a person.
E X A M P L E
Naphta has built a pipe bomb with Blast Power 9 
and weapon damage 2. When it detonates, one Zone-
Ghoul is within Near distance. Naphta rolls two /, 
which together with the weapon damage inflicts 
three points of damage on the Zone-Ghoul. Within 
Short range, there are five more Zone-Ghouls. They 
are exposed to a blast with Blast Power 3. Naphta 
rolls a joint roll for them, and gets one /. The five 
Zone-Ghouls suffer two points of damage each.
VEHICLES
In the Zone, there are

--- PAGE 97

06
9 5
Conflict & Trauma
Zone Travel:  Riding in a vehicle, exploring a sector 
of the Zone map requires half the time compared 
to walking (page 122).
VEHICLES IN COMBAT
In a conflict, you can move faster in a vehicle than 
on foot. Every maneuver spent on movement counts 
as two. For example, with only one maneuver you 
can move directly from Short distance to Arm’s 
Length, or from Long to Short distance.
Escaping From Danger:  In a tight spot you can 
use your vehicle to escape. Roll to Move as usual, 
but use the Gear Bonus of the vehicle.
Ramming Enemies: Most vehicles can be used as 
weapons, to simply run over your enemies. The at-
tack must occur at Arm’s Length. Roll to Fight, but 
use your Agility and your Move skill instead. The 
weapon damage is normally 1, but can be increased 
by a Gearhead (page 56).
E X A M P L E
The Gearhead Naphta has found an old Volvo (Gear 
Bonus +3) and got it running again. She wants to 
ram a savage mutant from Short range. She uses 
her maneuver in the turn to get to Arm’s Length, 
and then uses her action to ram her enemy. She rolls 
three Base Dice (Agility 3) two Skill Dice (Move skill 
2) and three Gear Dice. She initially fails her roll but 
decides to push it, ending up with one 
  and two /. 
The savage mutant suffers two points of damage, but 
the Volvo’s Gear Bonus is decreased to +2.
DAMAGE TO VEHICLES
Just like any other gear, vehicles can break down 
and lose Gear Bonus when you use them. When the 
Gear Bonus reaches zero, the vehicle won’t start any 
more, and needs to be repaired.
Resilience: The Gear Bonus of a vehicle can also 
be reduced by external damage. When a vehicle 
has taken a number of damage points equal to its 
Resilience rating, its Gear Bonus is reduced one 
step. When the total amount of damage inflicted 
on a vehicle reaches twice the Resilience rating, the 
Gear Bonus is reduced another step, and so on.
Armor:  Some vehicles have a metal hull protecting 
the vehicle itself and its occupants. Gearheads can 
improve the Armor Rating with the Jury-Rig skill.
Ramming a Vehicle: You can also use a vehicle to 
ram another vehicle – but only if your vehicle has 
an equal or higher Resilience r

--- PAGE 98





--- PAGE 99

07
9 7
The Ark
07
The Ark
The Ark is your home. This is where you have grown 
up together with the other mutants, protected from 
the horrors in the Zone around you. The Elder has 
kept you safe during the long winter, but the safe 
haven is no more. The Elder is dying. The People 
have become young adults, and grub is getting 
scarce. Mutant is turning on mutant, pacts are 
formed and plots whispered in the dark. But you 
must find a way to work together. The People of the 
Ark need to overcome their differences and find a 
new path forward. Evolve, build a new civilization 
on ruins of the old. If you can’t, the legacy of man-
kind will be lost forever.
CREATE YOUR ARK
The Ark, a settlement with a few hundred inhabit-
ants, is the starting point of the game. All PCs live 
in the Ark and have grown up there. Maybe you 
have never even left the Ark. The outside world, the 
Zone, is unknown and dangerous. Only Stalkers and 
other fools head out there.
To create your Ark is the first thing you should 
do when you have created your characters. It’s a 
simple process – just follow the steps below. Use 
the Ark Sheet at the end of this book, or download 
it from the Modiphius website.
1. ZONE LOCATION
Before you create the Ark itself, you need to deter-
mine what Zone it is in. Start by deciding where in 
the world the Zone is located. It may well be some-
where in your home country, or could be anywhere 
in the world. Preferably the Zone should, at least 
partly, contain the ruins of a city – why not your 
own home town?
Decide, as a group, what the general environ-
ment in the Zone looks like. Is it flat or hilly? What 
major rivers or coastlines are there, what landmarks?
Premade Zones: In the next chapter, you can find 
two premade Zone examples: The Dead Apple and 
The Big Smoke. You can choose to play in either of 
these Zones, or just use them only as inspiration 
for your own Zone.
2. THE ZONE MAP
The next step is to create a general map of the Zone. 
This map is based on reports from Stalkers or fad-
ing charts from the Old Age. On the inside covers of 
this book you will find maps of the two sample Zone 
mentioned above. You can choose either of these 
map

--- PAGE 100

07
9 8
Player’s Section
miles wide. You might think this is small, but re-
member that the Zone is a strange, labyrinthian 
landscape, often covered in smog – movement in 
the Zone is slow.
Most of the Zone map will be blank at the start 
of the game – only coastlines, major rivers or lakes, 
prominent landmarks and places rumored to hold 
great treasures or horrible dangers will be marked 
out. As play evolves, you will fill in the map (or the 
Zone Log) with details. Read more about exploring 
the Zone in the next chapter.
3. TYPE OF ARK
Once your Zone map is done, it’s time to look closer 
at the Ark itself and decide what it is. The People’s 
sanctuary may be located in a variety of different 
kinds of ruins from the Old Age. Examples:
 K Airplane Wreck
 K Bridge
 K Farm
 K Gated Community
 K Junkyard
 K Mall
 K Oil Rig
 K Prison
 K Scrap Village
 K Shelter
 K Shipwreck
 K Skyscraper
 K Small Island
 K Subway Station
 K Trailer Park
Discuss in the group and agree on something you 
all like.
4. ARK POSITION
Decide jointly in the group which sector to place 
the Ark in. Don’t put it right in the middle – the 
central parts of the Zone are usually those most 
contaminated by the Rot – but also not on the very 
edge. It is recommended, if not totally necessary, 
to place the Ark near the sea, a river or a large lake.
5. THE ARK MAP
The next step is to draw a rough map of the Ark, 
that will make it easier for you to visualize where 
things happen during play. Mark your PCs’ shelters 
on the map, as well as the Elder’s refuge (step 6 
below), the dens of the most important Bosses (step 
7) and the water source of the Ark (step 10).
In this chapter you will find two sample maps 
of typical Arks – a scrap village and a beached pas-
senger ferry. If you don’t have the time or the in-
clination to draw your own map, use one of these. 
You can also download the maps at www.modiphius.
com/mutant.
6. THE ELDER
Determine where in the Ark the Elder lives. He 
is rarely seen in person these days, but his den 
is still a hub of activity in the Ark and this is 
where the Chroniclers of the Dawn Vault (page 
113) most often can be found. Mark the spot on 
your Ark map.
7. TH
