--- PAGE 155

10
D EVOURER  (PAGE 178)
1 5 3
Threats Against the Ark
ZONE-GHOULS ATTACK
They attack before dawn, without warning or mercy. 
They come from the deeps of the Zone, and enter 
the Ark while the People are sleeping. Then, the 
massacre begins. The Zone-Ghouls kill, burn and 
plunder with a feverish frenzy. Can the People stop 
them – or is this the end?
 K One PC witnesses how an NPC he has a 
relationship to is surrounded by frenzied 
Zone-Ghouls.
 K The Zone-Ghouls set fire to part of the Ark. 
The flames spread quickly.
 K An NPC or a Boss tells a PC to flee with him. 
The Ark is lost and staying is suicide, he says.
Comment: Read more about the Zone-Ghouls on 
page 176. Use the rules for attacks against the Ark 
(page 114) to determine the flow of the battle. The 
attackers have Battle Level 2, or higher.
THE ZONE MONSTER
The People have had enough. There is a wild beast 
about that has torn mutants to pieces out in the 
Zone, and even started attacking people collecting 
scrap right outside the Ark’s walls. A Boss wants 
to lead a hunting expedition into the Zone to deal 
this threat once and for all.
 K The expedition leaves to hunt the beast. PCs 
are asked to join.
 K The beast can be a razorback (page 180), a 
devourer (page 178), or some other ferocious 
monster in Chapter 13. The hunting party 
finds the beast’s lair, riddled with remains of 
Zone-Ghouls and mutants.
 K The hunting team confronts the beast in a 
fight to the death. An expedition from an-
other Ark, or a group of Zone-Ghouls, can 
help or hinder.
THE ZONE SHAKES
It starts as a deep rumble from the very 
ground itself. Then the earth shakes, soon 
violently. Anyone not holding on to something 
is thrown to the ground. Then, as suddenly as it 
started, it’s over. For now.
 K The quakes return, even stronger. The Ark is 
damaged by the tremors, perhaps destroying 
a project.
 K A Boss (preferably a Cultist, page 100) pro-
claims that the quakes are a bad omen, a sign 
of the Ancients’ dissatisfaction with the Peo-
ple and a call for repentance.
 K The PCs and other mutants might search for 
the cause of the tremors. It is detonations in 
a bunker deep underground, a war between 
rival secu

--- PAGE 156





--- PAGE 157

11
1 5 5
Creating the Zone
11
Creating the Zone
The Zone is your playground, your fighting ring 
where you create deadly challenges for the PCs to 
overcome – or succumb to. Chapter 8 explains the 
basics of Zone travel from the PCs’ perspective. 
There, players can read about what kind of gear to 
bring, how long it takes to explore a sector (map 
grid square), and more. In this chapter, we take a 
closer look at how you as the GM can create the 
geography and inhabitants of the Zone, sector by 
sector. When the PCs enter a sector you can deter-
mine its contents, with the help of dice rolls if you 
like, in a few simple steps.
SPECIAL ZONE SECTORS
The tables in this chapter help you to quickly popu-
late sectors on the Zone map. But nothing stops you 
from describing certain sectors in greater detail. 
You can place them in specific locations on the map, 
but it is usually preferable to write them in such 
a way that they can be placed in almost any grid 
square on the map. Otherwise, you run the risk of 
the PCs simply not visiting your carefully crafted 
adventure locations.
Five ready-made such “Special Zone Sectors”, 
complete with maps and illustrations, can be found 
in Chapter 15. They work in most Zones and can be 
used as they are written or as inspiration to your 
own creations. More Special Zone Sectors will be 
published in the future.
EXPLORED SECTORS
Sectors that have been explored by the PCs are 
normally safe ground, emptied of both threats and 
artifacts. The Zone travelers can pass without risk 
– maybe. Nothing stops you from breaking the gen-
eral rule every now and then, it’s an effective tool 
to keep your players on their toes. Roll up or just 
choose a new threat. If you want to be nice to your 
players, you can have the PCs find artifacts that they 
missed on their first pass too. The Threat Level and 
Rot Level don’t change, however.
CREATING A SECTOR
The rest of this chapter describes how you create 
a sector in the Zone. Choose freely from the tables 
A GM ZONE MAP
The Zone is explored on the players’ Zone 
map, sector by sector. If you like, you can 
have your own version of the map, where 
you note down things you want to keep 
s

--- PAGE 158

11
1 5 6
GAmemaster’s Section
below or roll dice. Never be a slave to the dice – take 
the general area of the Zone into account, and reroll 
accordingly or simply pick whatever suits you. Fol-
low these simple steps:
1.	Determine the general terrain.
2.	Decide on a dominant ruin.
3.	Set the Rot Level.
4.	Set the Threat Level and roll the Threat Roll.
5.	If there is a threat in the sector, determine 
what it is.
6.	If there is an artifact, determine what it is.
7.	If there is a Stalker in the group, let him roll 
for Find the Path.
8.	If you like, roll or choose a sector mood 
element.
The Season: When you create a new sector, don’t 
forget to consider the current time of year in the 
campaign. If you roll up threats that don’t fit with 
the season, reroll or pick something else.
1. SECTOR ENVIRONMENT
Start by determining the general environment in 
the sector. Roll D66 or choose:
D66 e nv iron M en t r ui n t hr eat a rt ifact
11–12 Thick Woods No Yes No
13–15 Scrublands No Yes No
16–21 Marshlands No Yes No
22–24 Dead Woods No Yes No
25–26 Ash Desert No Yes No
31 Huge Crater No Yes No
32 Glasified Field No Yes No
33–35 Overgrown Ruins Yes Yes Yes
36–42 Crumbling Ruins Yes Yes Yes
43–51 Decayed Ruins Yes Yes Yes
52–56 Unscathed Ruins Yes Yes Yes
61–64 Derelict Industries Yes Yes Yes
65–66 Settlement* — — —
The columns Ruin, Threat and Artifact tell you 
if there typically  is an explorable ruin in the 
sector, if there is a presence of threats, and 
if there is chance to find artifacts. Remember, 
these are just guidelines, not rules – you are 
free to place ruins, threats and artifacts in any 
sectors you like.
SETTLEMENT
Settlements in the Zone are uncommon and unique 
locations. There can be ruins, threats and artifacts 
in a settlement, but don’t roll them up the normal 
way. Instead, describe the sector in greater detail. 
Use the Special Zone Sectors in Chapter 15 if you 
like – all of them are settlements of different sorts.
2. RUINS
If the sector environment (above) has a “Yes” in the 
Ruins column, you should determine a ruin that domi-
nates the sector. Of course, there are generally many 
ruined buildings in any sector, but this is the one that 
catc

--- PAGE 159

11
1 5 7
Creating the Zone
RUINS, NORMAL
D66 e nv iron M en t
11 Airplane Wreck
12 Amusement Park
13 Battlefield
14 Bus Station
15 Car Park
16 Church
21 Cinema
22 Crater
23 Dilapidated Mansion
24 Fast Food Joint
25 Gas Station
26 Highway
31 Hospital
32 Hunting Store
33 Mall
34 Marina
35 Museum
36 Office Building
41 Overgrown Park
42 Playground
43 Police Station
44 Radio Station
45 Residential Blocks
46 Road Tunnel
51 Ruined Bridge
52 School
53 Shelter
54 Skyscraper
55 Sports Center
56 Suburbia
61 Subway Station
62 Supermarket
63 Swimming Hall
64 Tank
65 Theater
66 Train Station
RUINS, I NDUSTRY
D66 e nv iron M en t
11–13 Factory
14–16 Military Base
21–23 Oil Cistern
24–26 Pipeline
31–33 Purification Plant
PLAYING ZONE TRAVEL
Zone travel is an important and fun part 
of the game – don’t be surprised if the 
first thing the players want to do in the 
first session of the game is to rush out 
into the Zone. Here is some advice on 
how to make the Zone expedition a re-
warding experience:
Follow the Players.  Let the players ex-
plore what they want. Do they feel like 
digging around in a ruined building 
that you just mentioned in passing? Let 
them! Consider expanding this location 
and place a Zone event (Chapter 9) there. 
Add an extra threat or artifact, or at least 
some fun scrap.
Don’t Get Stuck.  Despite the above para-
graph – every sector can’t contain threats 
and treasures. When you think the play-
ers have looked around enough and there 
is nothing more to be found in the sector 
– tell them. Avoid getting stuck for a long 
time in every sector. Some sectors are 
just empty wasteland and can be passed 
quickly.
Give Them Scrap.  Don’t forget the scrap 
table in the back of the book. Giving the 
PCs scrap often creates fun situations 
and helps to set the mood of the game, 
without making them more powerful. You 
don’t need to worry about giving them 
too much!



--- PAGE 160

11
1 5 8
GAmemaster’s Section
D66 e nv iron M en t
34–36 Power Line
41–43 Radio Mast
44–46 Refinery
51–53 Rubbish Dump
54–56 Shipwreck
61–63 Shooting Range
64–66 Windmill
3. ROT LEVEL
Choose or roll the Rot Level in the sector, a 
number from 0 to 3. Level 1 is by far the most 
common. No sector has Rot Level 3 in its entirety, 
only in specific locations in sector – so called Rot 
hotspots . You can read more about Rot Level and 
how it works in Chapter 8. If you have a secret GM 
Zone map (above) you can determine Rot Levels 
in advance.
D66 r ot  l ev el De S cr i P ti on
11–12 0 r ot  o as is.  The PCs are safe from the 
Rot here.
13–55 1 w ea
k r ot
.  The PCs suffer one Rot Point 
per day spent in such sectors.
56–66 2 r ot
- h ea
vy a re
a.  The PCs suffer one Rot 
Point per hour.
4. THREAT LEVEL
The next step is to determine the Threat Level, a 
number from zero and up. You set the Threat Level 
yourself, with the below table as a guideline. A high 
Threat Level means a more dangerous sector, but 
with a greater chance of finding untouched artifacts.
t hreat l evel De S cr i P ti on
1–4 Fringe Zone Sectors
t hreat l evel De S cr i P ti on
5–8 Central Zone Sectors
9+ Unusually Dangerous Areas
When the PCs walk into the sector, roll a 
number of Base Dice equal to the Threat 
Level. If the sector environment (above) has 
a “Yes” in the artifacts column, every / you 
roll means there is one artifact in the sector. 
If you roll at least one =, there is a threat in 
the sector, and the more = you roll, the more 
dangerous the threat is – see point 5 below.
n ig
httime:  After dark, it’s even more risky to 
travel in the Zone. As a rule of thumb, in-
crease the Threat Level by three at night.
5. THREATS IN THE ZONE
Threats in the Zone come in three types: humanoids, 
monsters and phenomena. Read more about them 
in Chapter 13. Roll D6 or choose:
D6 t hreat t y P e
1–2 Humanoid
3–5 Monster
6 Phenomenon
h umanoids  are individuals or groups of intel-
ligent beings, often connected to one factions 
of the Zone (page 170). Roll D66 or choose:
D66 h u M an oi D  t hr eat
11 Amnesiac
12–13 Beast Mutants
14–16 Cannibals
21–22 Doom Cultists
23–25 Exiled Mutants
26–32

--- PAGE 161

11
1 5 9
Creating the Zone
D66 h u M an oi D  t hr eat
43–44 Nova Cultists
45–46 Patrol from the Ark
51–52 Scrap Oracle
53–54 Wanderers
55–56 Water Trader
61–62 Wreckers
63–66 Zone-Ghouls
Monsters  are mindless beasts, roaming the 
wastelands. Some are mutated versions of 
common animals, others are different beings 
entirely. Roll D66 or choose:
D66 Mon S te r t hr eat
11–12 Acid Grass
13 Air Jellies
14 Automaton
15–16 Bitterbeasts
21–22 Deathworm
23–24 Devourer
25–26 Grazers
31 Gutfish (infected water)
32 Killer Tree
D66 Mon S te r t hr eat
33 Mind Mosquitoes
34 Nightmare Flowers
35 Parasite Fungus
36 Razorback
41–42 Rot Ants
43 Rotfish
44–45 Scrap Crows
46 Trash Hawk
51 Worm Swarm
52–54 Zone Dogs
55–56 Zone Leeches
61–63 Zone Rats
64–65 Zone Spider
65–66 Zone Wasps
Phenomena  are threats of a non-living nature. 
Roll D66 or choose:
D66 Pheno M en on t hr eat
11–13 Acid Rain
14–15 Ash Storm
16–21 Dust Tornado
22–23 Electric Storm
24 Ghost Lights
25 Inertia Field
26–31 Magnetic Field
32 Mirage
33–34 Mud Puddles
35–36 Night Lights
41 Obelisk
42–43 Pillars of Light
44–46 Rot Hotspot
51–52 Rot Wind
53–54 Sinkhole
55–56 Temperature Drop / Heat Wave
61–62 Unexploded Ordnance
63 Vacuum
64–66 Zone Smog
HANDLING THE THREAT ROLL
You can handle the threat roll in several 
different ways, depending on the prefer-
ences in your gaming group:
 K Reveal the Threat Level and roll the 
dice openly. This way, the players 
will know if there are artifacts and 
threats in the sector, but not what 
or where they are.
 K Roll the dice without showing the 
players the result.
 K Don’t roll dice at all, instead decide 
for yourself if there are artifacts 
and threats in the sector. In this 
case, you don’t even need to set a 
Threat Level at all.



--- PAGE 162

11
1 6 0
GAmemaster’s Section
THE STALKER & THREATS
A Stalker who successfully Finds the Path when en-
tering a new sector will spot the threat in time to 
avoid it. To move ahead, the PCs will often need to 
deal with the threat anyway – but they can engage 
it prepared and from some distance. If the Stalker 
fails his roll – or if there is no Stalker in the group 
– the PCs will walk right into the threat. If the threat 
is a living being, it will likely try to ambush them 
(page 81).
Comment: It’s important that even a group with a 
skilled Stalker doesn’t feel safe in the Zone. If the 
Stalker is too confident, let him spot the first threat 
in time, but then throw in another one when he least 
expects it. The Find the Path skill should be very 
useful, but not protect the group from all dangers.
6. ARTIFACTS
If the threat roll (step 4 above) determines that 
there are artifacts to be found in the sector – or if 
you decide that it is the case – it’s now time to de-
termine what they are. Draw random Artifact Cards 
or choose artifacts that you think are appropriate 
for the location or that would be interesting for the 
PCs to have. Don’t forget to slip them clues to Eden 
every now and then (Chapter 16).
Read more about artifacts in Chapter 14. There 
you can also find a random table to use if you don’t 
have access to the Artifact Cards.
THE STALKER & ARTIFACTS
If a Stalker Finds the Path and spends a stunt on 
finding artifacts, he will find one if it’s there to be 
found. He might not spot it immediately, but will 
have a pretty good idea of where to look.
Make them Fight for It: You are perfectly within 
your rights to put some obstacles in front of the 
artifact. Most likely it won’t just lie on the ground 
to be picked up. If there is a humanoid threat in 
the sector it is likely that this threat possesses the 
artifact, and the PCs will need to fight for it.
No Artifact Stunt? If the Stalker doesn’t spend a 
stunt on finding artifacts, or if there is no Stalker in 
the party, it doesn’t mean no artifacts will be found. 
You can still have the PCs find an artifact if you like, 
but you should have them work even harder for it! 
Which PC who spots th

--- PAGE 163

11
1 6 1
Creating the Zone
D66 P eo P le
14 v ictim.  A corpse, hanged or bound to a pole. Who did this, and why?
15 Message.  Someone has written something on a wall. What does it say, and how recent is it?
16 t ra
cks.  They lead deeper into the Zone. Who walked here and where did they go?
nature
21 b oulder.  A huge piece of rock. Protection from the Zone winds or a good lookout point?
22 t re
e.  A lonely tree still grows in the desolate wasteland. Does it hide some secret?
23 c re
ek.  A narrow stream flows through the landscape. Is it a source of life or of death by the Rot?
24 Zone f lo
wers.  Out of place in the pale zonelands, a field of strange flowers with striking colors grow.
25 t hi
stles.  A thick undergrowth covers the sector. Boots and gear gets stuck in it. Do the bushes hide some secret?
26 v in
es.  Lots of thick vines cover the ruins here. Are they dead and shriveled or still alive?
weather
31 t orrential r ai n.  A sudden downpour or heavy snowfall hits the PCs. They’d better seek cover.
32 f og
.  A thick haze blankets the area. Visibility is reduced to a few yards, and sounds muffled. What lurks in the fog?
33 b la
zing Sun.  Scorching sunlight bakes the PCs. Their skin burns and their clothes are soon wet from sweat.
34 b lu
e Sky.  The ever-present dirty Zone haze suddenly evaporates, revealing a stark blue sky. It is both beautiful and 
frightening.
35 Dark c lo
uds.  The sky darkens and the wind picks up. Dust whirls around across the broken old pavement. A storm is 
brewing.
36 t hu
nder.  The deep sound distant thunder rolls over the Zone. Sudden lightning flashes across the ruins.
re M ain S
41 r oad Sign.  A metal sign stands alone, left from the Old Age. Does it show the way to something, or warn of some danger?
42 w re
ck.  The remains of some old vehicle, rusted beyond repair. Its metal husk is still intact. Has someone sought shelter there?
43 Movie Poster.  A torn and worn old poster from the Old Age shows a strange scene. What do the PCs make of it?
44 t he
 Dead.  D6 withering skeletons from the Old Age. What story could these old bones tell?
45 c he
ckpoint.  A roadblock from the final dying days of the Old Age. Could the

--- PAGE 164





--- PAGE 165

12
1 6 3
RUINS IN THE ZONE
12
Ruins in the Zone
Ruins, the remains of the buildings from the Old 
Age, are something the mutants will see a lot of 
when they leave the Ark. All of the example ruins 
included in the tables in Chapter 11 are described 
in greater detail here. Use these texts as inspiration 
when describing what the PCs see in the Zone. You 
should amend these descriptions to account for the 
general terrain of the sector (page 156).
NORMAL RUINS
KK AIRPLANE WRECK
A huge metal tube lies broken and crushed on 
the ground. It is scorched by fire and inside there 
are rows of ancient seats, all blackened by flames. 
Stretching away from the tube, the ground is 
scorched and all houses destroyed, as if the tube 
had come crashing from the sky at incredible 
speed.
KK AMUSEMENT PARK
A bizarre huddle of rusting machines and decrepit 
large tents, in colors that once were stark. The 
remains of the tent cloth flaps in the wind. On a 
picture, a man with a white face and a large red 
nose smiles at you. One machine is a large wooden 
disc with plastic horses mounted on it. The disc is 
placed on a motor and seems to have been able 
to rotate.
KK BATTLEFIELD
This area is completely devastated. Rusty rebars 
protrude from broken blocks of concrete that once 
were the walls of homes. The ruins are scorched 
by explosions and riddled with bullet holes. Small 
craters pockmark the ground.
KK BUS STATION
Among flaking road signs with illegible numbers 
and letters, several big old motor vehicles stand 
rusting away. Some have two decks, others have an 
accordion-like contraption in the middle and can 
bend. The Ancients’ machines are truly mysterious.
KK CAR PARK
The concrete pillars have given in and the entire, 
circular building has collapsed like an accordion 
pressed together. In the debris, lots of motor vehi-
cles from the Old Age are buried. Maybe some of 
them could be repaired?
KK CHURCH
The ancient spire on the stone building reaches far 
into the sky, its sharp point lost in the Zone haze. 
Inside, there are rows of rotten wooden benches, 
all turned toward the figure of a man hanging on 
a cross. The Ancients used to come here to talk to 
their Bos

--- PAGE 166

12
1 6 4
GAmemaster’s Section
Comment: This ruin can of course be replaced by 
a temple or a mosque, if that fits better with your 
campaign environment.
KK CINEMA
Next to a large entrance leading into the dark inte-
rior of this building, a number of yellowing posters 
hang in huge frames. Each of the posters depict 
dramatic motifs from the Old Age. In this cavern-
ous building, the Ancients watched moving images 
on a screen.
KK CRATER
A gigantic hole appears in the ground, at least 50 
yards across. Some ancient weapon of annihila-
tion must have struck here, destroying everything 
nearby. In the bottom of the crater, there is a small 
lake of greenish rotwater.
KK DILAPIDATED MANSION
This dark and decrepit house was old even before 
the Fall. It’s built of wood and stone and has some-
how managed to withstand the decades of neglect. 
What could be hidden inside its dark halls?
KK FAST FOOD JOINT
A large M in the shape of two dirty yellow arcs 
adorn the facade of this ruined building. There are 
many facilities like this in the Zone. What used to 
be in them no one knows any longer, but Stalk-
ers tend to avoid them because of the strong Rot 
inside.
KK GAS STATION
Underneath an open roof next to a low house, a 
number of car wrecks are left to rust. Next to them 
there are machines with hoses and faucets. Anyone 
who knows his way around the Zone knows that this 
is a place where the Ancients repaired their vehicles 
and filled them up with fuel.
KK HIGHWAY
The concrete is cracked and the markings on the 
road surface are all but worn away. Before the Fall, 
the Ancients would whizz by here at incredible 
speeds in their shiny motor carriages. Now, the old 
cars stand by the roadside, burnt out and rusted 
beyond repair.
KK HOSPITAL
When the Apocalypse came, the Ancients flooded 
this concrete hulk of a building, desperately hoping 
to be saved. Now, this is a crumbling ruin. Decayed 
corpses lie everywhere in rooms and hallways, on 
beds and on the floors.
KK HUNTING STORE
Among the decrepit shelves in this place you can 
find fishing poles, hooks and lines. A skilled Stalker 
can use these items to find edible fish in the Zone 
waters (page 56). On the 

--- PAGE 167

12
1 6 5
RUINS IN THE ZONE
Now, the Zone dust blows in through the broken 
windows.
KK OVERGROWN PARK
Tall trees and thick bushes grow wild here and have 
completely overgrown the area. Benches, walking 
paths and fountains are hidden by thick weeds and 
the lawns are turned into marshlands. There are 
many rumors about the creatures that roam the old 
parks in the Zone.
KK PLAYGROUND
Car tires hang in rusty chains from a metal frame. 
A wooden sandbox has turned into a stinking pool 
of mud. Acid rains have gnawed holes in the metal 
slides long ago. Here, the Ancients played with their 
children. A few cracked plastic toys have survived 
the decades of wear and still lie abandoned in the 
sand.
KK POLICE STATION
Outside of this large building, wrecks of identical 
blue and white cars are rusting away. The tires and 
long since gone, but the blue plastic lamps on their 
roofs are still there. In the basement of the build-
ing, there are rooms that cannot be opened from 
the inside.
KK RADIO STATION
A forest of rusty antennae and metal discs protrude 
from the roof of this massive building. A sign on 
the facade shows an antenna with rings around it.
KK RESIDENTIAL BLOCKS
Several identical tall buildings, made of concrete 
that is now cracked and crumbling. On the ground 
between these monoliths, there are rotted benches 
and tall weeds. Car wrecks are everywhere, most 
rusted beyond repair. Each of the buildings has 
a large number of identical apartments. Inside, 
you can find decrepit furniture, clothes and other 
items.
KK ROAD TUNNEL
The entrance to this broad tunnel looks like the 
maw of an enormous beast. Outside, an innumer-
able amount of cars, trucks and buses stand tightly 
packed together, slowly rusting into nothing. What-
ever horror the occupants of these vehicles were 
fleeing from, it is obvious few survived.
KK RUINED BRIDGE
The remains of a majestic bridge rise tall in the 
Zone haze. It has collapsed in both directions and 
only two thick pillars remain, but if you can climb 
up onto the remaining roadway you’ll have a great 
lookout position.
KK SCHOOL
On the crumbling brick facade of this building 
hangs a clock that stopped long ago. Bel

--- PAGE 168

12
1 6 6
GAmemaster’s Section
KK SUBURBIA
A street with identical small houses in even rows 
on each side. The grass and bushes have withered 
away long ago, everything is covered in ashes. In-
side the houses, decomposing clothes and other 
personal items remain. The inhabitants must have 
left in a hurry. Car wrecks, and other remains from 
the Ancients who used to live here, abound. Much 
has decayed over time and some of the houses have 
completely collapsed.
KK SUBWAY STATION
By a stairway leading down into the underground 
a large sign with flaking paint hangs. All Stalkers 
know what this sign means. This is an entrance to 
the tunnels under the Zone. In the deeps, terrible 
dangers await – but perhaps also many untouched 
artifacts.
KK SUPERMARKET
A grand building rises among the ruins. Its large 
windows were broken many decades ago, and the 
Zone dust drifts in unhindered. Before the Fall, this 
building housed an unimaginable amount of food, 
drink, kitchen utensils and other things that the 
Ancients consumed at a dizzying rate. Now, most 
of it is looted, burnt or decayed.
KK SWIMMING HALL
Inside this large ruin, there are big pools filled with 
mud and slimy algae. Noxious and toxic fumes meet 
anyone who enters. It’s hard to imagine that the 
Ancients went here voluntarily to bathe in the pools.
KK TANK
A massive and awe-inspiring metal vehicle blocks 
the path. Its enormous tracks have rusted stuck 
long ago and no death or destruction has spewed 
out from its cannon for many decades, but coming 
close to this metal beast still strikes fear into the 
heart of almost any Zone wanderer.
KK THEATER
Inside of this dark ruin is a great hall, filled with 
rows of seats facing a large stage with a grand red 
curtain. The Ancients came here to see singing, 
dancing and stage plays.
KK TRAIN STATION
Ancient railway cars stand rusting on overgrown 
tracks. In these, the Ancients used to travel quickly 



--- PAGE 169

12
1 6 7
RUINS IN THE ZONE
and effectively all across the Zone and beyond. Now, 
the only passengers are decaying corpses.
INDUSTRIAL RUINS
KK FACTORY
The metal roof of this large, flat building has caved 
in long ago. Inside, there are machines and strange 
vehicles with huge forks in the front. Everything in 
here is ravaged by decades of rain and wind. Some 
rusty old barrels have fallen over and a greenish 
sludge has leaked out onto the floor.
KK FIRING RANGE
Empty shell casings litter this large open area. In 
one end, there is a large earthwork with lots of 
pockmarks from bullets. In a shed close by there 
are targets in the shape of humans and animals. In 
the Old Age, they could afford to spend bullets on 
shooting at paper figures.
KK MILITARY BASE
A large square courtyard with brick buildings on 
each side. In the buildings, there are a great number 
of identical rooms with metal bunk beds. Beyond 
these buildings there is a large garage with several 
burnt out vehicles inside.
KK OIL TANK
This large cylinder-shaped metal building has a 
narrow stairway winding its way around the out-
side wall, all the way to the top. Up there, you could 
spot any threats from a safe distance. The building 
contains a huge tank filled by a sticky, black liquid. 
A Gearhead could use this as fuel. The problem is 
just getting it out…
KK PIPELINE
A thick rusty metal pipe runs through this part of 
the Zone. It’s wide enough for a mutant to crawl 
through. The gas and oil has stopped flowing 
through these pipes long ago. Now, they can only 
serve as scrap.
KK POWER LINE
A tall tower made of rusty metal beams rises into 
the Zone sky. It has collapsed halfway up, and the 
sharp spire has folded down toward the ground. 
Thick cables, that once supplied electricity to the 
entire Zone, now lie draped across the ground.
KK PURIFICATION PLANT
The stench intensifies for each and every step closer 
to this building. But Stalkers know that the smell of 
decay can hide an invaluable treasure. These large 
pools, tanks and machines purified the Ancients’ 
drinking water. Could there still be clean water in 
any of the tanks?
KK RADIO MAST
A tall metal mast rises high above the

--- PAGE 170





--- PAGE 171

13
1 6 9
Threats in the Zone
13
THREATS 
IN THE ZONE
The Zone might seem empty and lifeless, but hid-
den amongst the ruins there is life. Strange and 
alien creatures, but life all the same. For the mutants 
of the People, isolated in the Ark for decades, meet-
ing these alien creatures is a frightening experience. 
This chapter describes the humanoid beings and 
monsters that live in the Zone, as well as other phe-
nomena that the PCs can encounter. Collectively, 
these are called Zone threats.
THREATS AND EVENTS
When you want to spring a typical event (Chapter 
9) on the PCs in the Zone, you can go to this chap-
ter to choose what specific threat the PCs encounter. 
You can also let a random dice roll make the choice 
for you – see Chapter 11. Regardless of whether you 
choose threats or roll them up – always try to use 
them in ways that are interesting and challenging 
for the PCs and the players themselves. This is what 
the typical events in Chapter 9 are for.
In the Ark:  The PCs generally encounter the 
threats described in this chapter when traveling in 
the Zone. But they can meet, or at least hear about, 
the Zone threats in the Ark too. Some of them ap-
pear on the Threat Cards (see Chapter 10 for more 
information).
MAKE EVERY THREAT UNIQUE
The threats of the Zone should feel al-
ien and frightening for the PCs – and for 
the players. As a rule, don’t let the PCs 
encounter the same threat several times 
– at least not in the same way. Make every 
encounter with a threat unique, a new ex-
perience for the players. Also, don’t use 
the name of a threat unless the PCs know 
it (like Zone-Ghouls, who are fairly well 
known to the People). Let the description 
of the threat speak for itself. If the play-
ers make up their own names for crea-
tures they meet, let them.



--- PAGE 172

13
1 7 0
GAmemaster’s Section
COLD & DARK
Whatever threat you let the PCs encounter, you can 
use cold and darkness to make the situation even 
more challenging. See Chapter 6 for rules on this.
HUMANOIDS
For a long while, the mutants in the Ark thought 
they were all that remained of human civilization 
in this fallen world. They were wrong. Among the 
ruins several other groups live, big and small tribes 
of mutants and other beings. They can become the 
People’s allies – or enemies. These humanoids come 
in two forms – mutants and humans.
Mutants:  The PCs’ Ark is not the only one in the 
Zone (the boxed text below). Technically, other 
mutants function just like NPCs from the PCs’ Ark 
(Chapter 9). Mutants in other Arks can have roles 
and specialist skills just like PCs, while mutants not 
living in an Ark generally don’t have roles or skills.
Humans:  There are other people out there, who 
are not mutants. They are humans, who somehow 
have survived the Apocalypse. Non-mutants gener-
ally don’t have roles or specialist skills. Naturally, 
they don’t have mutations or use Mutation Points. 
Humans will be described further in a coming ex-
pansion to the game.
Languages:  Most groups in the Zone share the 
same original language, but having lived separated 
from each other for years or decades, distinctly dif-
ferent dialects have evolved. Usually, the PCs can 
communicate with people they meet in the Zone on 
a basic level. However, to manage a more complex 
dialogue with another group, have the PCs make a 
Comprehend roll. A failed roll means there is some 
kind of misunderstanding.
Stats:  All attribute scores and skill levels indicated 
for the humanoids below should only be seen as 
typical ratings. Feel free to change them for indi-
vidual NPCs whenever you like.
OTHER ARKS
The PCs’ Ark is not the only one in the Zone. 
As they will learn during play, there are other 
Arks, with other mutants. This insight will have 
monumental consequences for the PCs, and 
for all of the People.
The different Arks have evolved into 
unique societies different from the People – 
very different, in some cases. Some Arks have 
been lost altogether – their former inhabit

--- PAGE 173

13
1 7 1
Threats in the Zone
the ones that still survive, live as savages, 
roaming the Zone.
For a detailed example of another Ark, 
see Chapter 15. When the PCs visit another 
Ark, use this one or make your own based on 
the guidelines in Chapter 7.
AMNESIAC
A human woman staggers through the Zone. Her 
eyes are glazed over and seem to focus on some 
imagined horror. She mumbles alien words, barely 
audible. She wears dirty and torn coveralls with 
strange markings. She doesn’t respond to the PCs 
and collapses on the ground if they try to stop her. 
Unless Healed, she dies in a couple of hours. If she 
survives the PCs can talk to her, but her dialect is 
foreign and she seems to have lost all memory of 
who she is and where she came from. She might 
have a clue to the location of Eden (Chapter 16).
If you have played the Threat Card called The 
Man on the Beach (page 148), the PCs can recog-
nize both the clothing and the dialect – the woman 
has the same. She also reacts in a similar way if 
brought to the Ark. Just like the man on the beach, 
the woman is one of the cryo-frozen lab assistants 
from Project Eden – see Chapter 16.
a ttributes:  Strength 2 (currently 1), Agility 2 (currently 1), 
Wits 4, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Comprehend 2, Heal 1.
Mutations:  None.
w ea
pons:  None.
−2
BEAST MUTANTS
Out in the Zone, there is a tribe of beings that are 
different from all others. They are not human mu-
tants and they are not wild beasts – they are both. 
They are animals, but they walk upright on their 
hind legs, use tools and have a spoken language – 
primitive and coarse, but a language nonetheless. 
They are newcomers to the Zone, on their guard or 
even hostile to strangers. Despite their few numbers 
the beast mutants seem to belong to several differ-
ent species – some look like ragged dogs or wolves, 
others are short and rodent-like, and a third variety 
are monkey-like climbers.
The truth is that the beast mutants – like the 
People themselves – can trace their origin to the 
genetics labs of the Ancients, bred to be able to 
−1
KNOW THE ZONE
When PCs meet a threat in the Zone, they 
can roll for the Know the Zone skill to 
know something about it (pa

--- PAGE 174

13
1 7 2
GAmemaster’s Section
survive the harsh world after the Apocalypse. They 
are animals given parts of the human intellect and 
fine motor skills. The small tribe that recently ar-
rived in the Zone has fled from an old research fa-
cility located in a distant mountain range, where 
many of their kin still are being held captive by the 
mysterious Watchers. The escapees have journeyed 
to the area of the Zone to find a new home.
The beast mutants and their origin will be ex-
plored in a future expansion to Mutant: Year Zero.
Dog:  Strength 4, Agility 5, Wits 3, Empathy 2, Fight 1, Move 1.
b ea
r:  Strength 5, Agility 4, Wits 2, Empathy 3, Fight 2.
r od
ent:  Strength 2, Agility 5, Wits 5, Empathy 2, Sneak 2.
Monkey:  Strength 3, Agility 5, Wits 4, Empathy 2, Move 2.
Mutations:  These beasts are mutants, but of a different kind 
than the People. They don’t have mutations and they don’t 
use Mutation Points.
w ea
pons:  Scrap spear, slingshot, fangs (weapon damage 2, 
no Gear Bonus).
CANNIBALS
A group of wiry mutants wearing rags and white 
face paint. These mutants come from an Ark 
where the scientists died early on (see Chapter 
16), and the abandoned children developed a very 
brutal society. They are sly and bloodthirsty, and 
they hunger for fresh mutant meat. They can’t 
easily be reasoned with (modification -3 to any 
Manipulation attempt, and even a successful roll 
will only buy the PCs time until the cannibals get 
hungry again). Only a very clear show of force 
will deter the cannibals. Any fallen mutants in 
their own ranks will soon become grub for the 
survivors.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 4, Wits 3, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Fight 2, Move 1.
Mutations:  One random mutation.
w ea
pons:  Scrap spear or slingshot.
DOOM CULTISTS
A small band of mutants, expelled from their Ark 
years ago, who worship a particular ruin or artifact 
in the Zone. They have lost all common sense and 
live only to worship the object, which they think 
will bring the Ancients back to Earth. The cultists 
may try to recruit PCs and NPCs, or capture them 
to sacrifice them to their deity. The cult may be in 
possession of a clue to Eden (Chapter 16).
a ttributes:  Stre

--- PAGE 175

13
1 7 3
Threats in the Zone
from another Ark, but have been exiled for some 
reason. They beg the PCs for help, but they also 
take the first chance they get to attack and steal 
the PCs grub – or worse. If the PCs are friendly, 
the exiles can tell them about their Ark – and they 
might even have a clue about the location of Eden 
(Chapter 16).
a ttributes:  Strength 2, Agility 2, Wits 2, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Move 1, Fight 1.
Mutations:  One random mutation.
w ea
pons:  Blunt instrument or slingshot.
Special:  Physical contact with one of the exiles counts as a 
Rot attack (page 126).
EXPEDITION  
FROM ANOTHER ARK
An expedition, not unlike the PCs’ own, but from 
another Ark. The strangers are about as many as 
the PCs. If they haven’t met mutants from another 
Ark before (through the Threat Card called “The 
Other People”, see page 150), this meeting can be 
a turning point in the history of both peoples. The 
expedition may have an artifact with a clue leading 
to the location of Eden (Chapter 16).
a ttributes:  Depends on role (page 139). At least one of the 
patrol members is a Stalker.
Skills:  Depends on role.
Mutations:  One random mutation.
w ea
pons:  Spiked bat or scrap rifle.
HELLDRIVERS
Thunder as from an approaching storm rolls 
across the zonelands. Soon, a horde of bizarre ve-
hicles comes rolling. Cars, buses, motorcycles and 
trucks – all adorned with sharp spikes, skulls and 
scrap. The feared Helldrivers are mutants who left 
their Ark long ago and were lucky enough to come 
across a big garage with operational vehicles from 
the Old Age.
+1
±0
a ttributes:  Strength 4, Agility 5, Wits 2, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Shoot 3, Fight 2, Jury-Rig 1.
Mutations:  One random mutation.
w ea
pons:  Bicycle chain, scrap rifle, scrap armor (Armor 
Rating 3).
v eh
icles:  The Helldrivers have a number of vehicles (see page 
94 for rules and page 199 for stats), often fitted with flameth-
rowers or even scrap cannons.
MORLOCKS
Some degenerate wild mutants from lost Arks have 
taken refuge underground, in tunnels and shelters. 
These are called morlocks. During the years, the 
morlocks have lost what little civilization they 
started with. Now, they are little mo

--- PAGE 176

13
1 7 4
GAmemaster’s Section
careful, they can track the cultists back to their lair 
(page 212).
a ttributes:  Strength 2, Agility 3, Wits 5, Empathy 4.
Skills:  Move 2, Heal 1.
Mutations:  One random mutation, but mental ones (Mind 
Terror, Puppeteer, Pathokinesis, Pyrokinesis, Telepathy). The 
Nova Cultists are powerful and normally start out with 6 MP 
instead of 3.
w ea
pons:  —
PATROL FROM THE ARK
This patrol from the PCs’ own Ark has found a 
valuable artifact, or they say they know where to 
find one. The leader either wants help to bring the 
artifact back to the Ark, or help to retrieve it. One 
of the members of the patrol can very well be an 
NPC that a PC has a relationship to.
a ttributes:  Depends on role (page 139). At least one of the 
patrol members is a Stalker.
Skills:  Depends on role.
Mutations:  One random mutation each.
w ea
pons:  Spiked bat, scrap knife, scrap rifle.
—
SCRAP ORACLE
A short and stocky mutant, dressed in a bizarre out-
fit made of scrap of all shapes and sizes. He’s an 
oddball character with powerful mental mutations, 
a telepath that can see visions of the PCs’ possible 
future. His powers can help the PCs interpret a clue 
to Eden or guide them in some other way. You can 
use the scrap oracle to nudge the PCs in some di-
rection that you’d like the campaign to go.
a ttributes:  Strength 2, Agility 3, Wits 4, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Manipulate 2.
Mutations:  Telepathy, Pathokinesis, Rot-Eater. 6 MP .
w ea
pons:  —
WANDERERS
A scrawny and grim-faced band of humans in tat-
tered clothes with a strange look come walking 
through the zonelands. They are on their guard 
but not hostile. If the PCs show that they mean no 
harm, the wanderers can tell – in a strange and for-
eign dialect – that they have walked for years from 
a mountain range far away. They ask for grub and 
water. They want to know where the PCs’ settlement 
is, and may get hostile if they refuse to answer.
−1
−1
N OVA  C ULTISTS



--- PAGE 177

13
1 7 5
Threats in the Zone
See the Ark threat called “The Wanderers” 
(page 152) for more information on what might hap-
pen if the wanderers come to the Ark. If you have 
already used this Ark threat, this can be a splinter 
group that has left the main community after some 
internal strife. Finally, the wanderers might have a 
clue to Eden (Chapter 16).
a ttributes:  Strength 4, Agility 3, Wits 4, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Shoot 3, Fight 2, Comprehend 1.
Mutations:  None.
w ea
pons:  Scrap knifes, scrap axes, one or more artifacts.
WATER TRADER
A lonesome traveler who defies the dangers of the 
zonelands to trade with clean water. He’s a tall mu-
tant pulling a simple cart, followed by two scrawny 
mutts. On the cart there are old plastic bottles, big 
jerrycans and a strange contraption built of pipes 
and bottles (a Jury-Rigged purification set). The 
water trader is friendly sort and always ready to do 
business – and quite ready to defend himself if he 
needs to. He knows much about the Zone and can 
tell the PCs where other settlements are located. He 
may also have a clue to Eden, which he could trade 
for. He will ask where the PCs live and will try to 
get to the Ark to do business.
a ttributes:  Strength 2, Agility 3, Wits 4, Empathy 5.
Skills:  Manipulate 2, Shoot 1, Jury-Rig 1.
Mutations:  One random mutation.
w ea
pons:  Scrap pistol (5 bullets)
Special:  The water trader can sell Rot-free water. It may 
contain spawn of Gutfish however (page 179). The price – as 
always – is a matter of demand. The more desperate for 
water the PCs are, the more the trader will charge for it.
WRECKERS
A surprisingly intact big old vehicle wreck sits in a 
clearing in the Zone. Its windows are dirty and its 
hatches locked. The wreck is a trap. A band of sav-
age mutants or Zone-Ghouls uses it as bait for un-
witting Zone travelers. Their typical plan is simple: 
±0
±0
They charge out and try attack their victims before 
they see what’s coming. They will steal everything 
and take any survivors as slaves in their tribe. The 
wreckers haven’t been able to open the armored car 
themselves. If the PCs manage to get in, they will find 
an artifact. The car engine is decay

--- PAGE 178

13
1 7 6
GAmemaster’s Section
ZONE-GHOULS
When Stalkers tell harrowing stories by the trash-
can fires in the Ark, they are most often about the 
Zone-Ghouls. These aggressive people live like 
nomads in the Zone, moving in the shadows and 
attacking other travelers without warning. They are 
most active at night. There are many rumors about 
the Zone-Ghouls – it is said that they flay and eat 
mutants taken captive.
Zone-Ghouls are generally shorter than mu-
tants, and they move in large groups. They hide 
their faces in hoods or masks made of scrap from 
the Old Age, and often wear scavenged plastic 
cloaks to protect them against sunlight and acid 
rains. Their hands and feet are wrapped in plastic 
or cloth.
a ttributes:  Strength 3, Agility 4, Wits 3, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Move 3, Shoot 2, Fight 1.
Mutations:  None.
w ea
pons:  Bicycle chain, slingshot.
Special:  In direct sunlight, the Zone-Ghouls take one point of 
damage per hour, despite their protective clothing.
MONSTERS
The variety of mutated beasts out in the Zone are 
collectively known as monsters . They lack the ad-
vanced intelligence and intricate social skills of 
mutants and humans, and therefore don’t have the 
attributes Wits and Empathy. They cannot suffer 
confusion or doubt, and they cannot be Manipu-
lated or Intimidated. Some monsters even lack Agil-
ity – they can’t suffer fatigue.
Skills:  Some monsters lack skills – that means they 
only roll Base Dice when performing an action. If 
they lack an attribute that a skill is based on, they 
cannot roll for that skill at all. Monsters cannot push 
dice rolls and they generally don’t use Mutation 
Points.
Maneuvers:  Just like humanoids, monsters can per-
form one action and one maneuver, or two maneu-
±0 vers, in each turn (page 80). The only maneuver 
that monsters generally use is movement.
Weapons:  Monsters often have natural weapons 
like claws or fangs. These weapons have a weapon 
damage, but don’t provide a Gear Bonus.
Swarms: A special type of monster is the swarm, 
that is actually a great number of small creatures 
that rules-wise count as one being. Swarms function 
like other monsters, with two differences:
 K A swarm can div

--- PAGE 179

13
1 7 7
Threats in the Zone
AIR JELLIES
Air Jellies are strange creatures, translucent fleshy 
bubbles the size of an open palm. Thin, long feelers 
hang down from the main body. They are lighter 
than air and hover, blowing wherever the wind takes 
them. Anything that the feelers come into contact 
with is covered by a sticky, acidic liquid – not harm-
ful to human skin, but corrosive to metal.
e ffect:  Air Jellies don’t attack mutants themselves, but rather 
their gear. Roll to attack against using six Base Dice (the 
Strength score of the swarm). Every / decreases the Gear 
Bonus of the target item by one step. The attacks continue 
until the Air Jellies are destroyed or the victims manage to 
escape.
Swarm:  Air Jellies can only be hurt by fire or 
explosions.
±0 AUTOMATON
In the dark depths of the enclaves (Chapter 16), the 
Titan Powers built machines of metal, plastic and 
circuits, so advanced that they could compete with 
their own creators in intelligence, adaptability and 
creativity. Some researchers even experimented in 
melting together man and machine, in the hope of 
creating a being more adapted to surviving in the 
postapocalyptic world.
Robots and biomechatronic beings, in many 
shapes and sizes, will be explored in a future ex-
pansion to Mutant: Year Zero . But already in the 
base game, PCs can run into a rare automaton that 
for some reason has found its way to the Zone. For 
the People, such a being will be seen as a horrible 
abomination, a walking or hovering metal being 
with weapons mounted in its very body.
−2
A UTOMATON



--- PAGE 180

13
1 7 8
GAmemaster’s Section
a ttributes:  Strength 8, Agility 6.
Skills:  Fight 4, Shoot 4.
a rm
or:  10
w ea
pons:  Chainsaw (weapon damage 2), laser weapon 
(weapon damage 2, Long range). The weapons are 
built-in, cannot be used by others and don’t give a Gear 
Bonus.
Special:  The Automaton cannot suffer fatigue at 
all. Its Agility score never decreases.
BITTERBEAST
Dangerous creatures that Stalkers call Bitterbeasts 
often prowl the Zone close to lakes and swamps. 
These are giant lizards, twice the size of a normal 
mutant. Bitterbeasts are fairly intelligent and it is 
even said they can be tamed and used as mounts. 
That’s not without risk however. The Bitterbeasts 
are known for their foul temper and the ability that 
has given them their name – they spit acid with 
alarming accuracy.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 4 (lower in cold weather).
Skills:  Endure 3, Fight 2, Shoot 3.
a rm
or:  2
w ea
pons:  Bite (weapon damage 2), acid spit (Short range, 
weapon damage 1).
DEATHWORM
A mutated abomination that hunts by burrowing 
through the ground and waiting for an unwitting 
victim to pass by. The Deathworm is twice the 
length of a mutant and thick as a leg. It’s covered 
in scales, has innumerable small legs and a big gap-
ing maw with several rings of small but very sharp 
teeth. The beast is very tenacious and will keep 
attacking until its victim or it is dead. It lacks the 
intelligence to flee.
a ttributes:  Strength 8, Agility 3.
Skills:  Fight 3, Sneak 5 (underground), Move 5 
(underground).
+1
±0
a rmor:  —
w ea
pons:  Maw (weapon damage 2). On a hit, the Death-
worm attaches itself to the victim and tries to drag it un-
derground. The victim must make a Force roll (one action) 
to break free. In the meantime, the Deathworm can keep 
attacking the victim with its inner rings of teeth, and gets a +3 
modification.
DEVOURER
A large and savage predator, taller than a mutant 
when it stands on its hind legs. It has grey fur and 
looks a little like a bear, but the similarities end 
there. The Devourer has an insatiable hunger for 
flesh, can move with extreme silence, and has ab-
normally huge jaws. It sneaks up on its prey, who 
often doesn’t 

--- PAGE 181

13
1 7 9
Threats in the Zone
GUTFISH
The Gutfish is a feared parasite that spreads 
through drinking water. Even Rot-free water can 
be infected – the only way to be safe is to boil the 
water. The Gutfish spawn grow inside the stom-
ach of the host, feeding off whatever the host eats. 
When the Gutfish, which looks more like an eel 
than a fish, is fully grown (approximately six feet 
long) it bites its way out and slithers away to the 
nearest lake or creek.
e ffect:  After the infection, the host gets incredibly hungry and 
must eat at least two rations of grub per day not to become 
starving (page 92). After 2D6 days, the Gutfish is fully grown 
and tries to gnaw its way out. This will automatically break 
the host (Strength drops to zero) and suffers the Bleeding Gut 
critical injury (entry 52 on the table on page 91).
KILLER TREE
An overgrown area that is unnervingly still and 
quiet. This is the home of one of the most feared 
and bizarre beings in the entire Zone – the Killer 
Tree. Its thick, dark trunk ends in a gaping maw, 
that is surrounded by slithering tentacles. Among 
the tree’s thick and gnarled roots lie bones, skulls 
and rusty gear – remains of the Killer Tree’s many 
victims.
The most astonishing parts of this semi-sentient 
plant are its humanoid seed pods. They can mimic 
human (or mutant) appearance and even speech, 
but lack actual intelligence. The seed pods prowl 
the area, hunting for victims to feed their ever hun-
gry mother tree.
a ttributes:  Strength 10, Agility 6.
Skills:  Fight 3.
a rm
or:  6
w ea
pons:  Tentacles (Near range, the Base Dice and Skill 
Dice can be distributed across several victims, weapon dam-
age 1, upon a hit the victim is snared and must make a Force 
to get free), maw (weapon damage 3, can only be used on a 
snared victim).
Mind Control: The Killer Tree can lure its victims 
close with powerful telepathic pulses. Anyone 
within Short range must roll to Move – a failed roll 
±0
−1
means the victim suffers one point of confusion 
and must move closer to the tree.
Seed Pods: Victims who manage to withstand the 
tree’s mind powers are usually attacked by its hu-
manoid seed pods. In their natural state, the p

--- PAGE 182

13
1 8 0
GAmemaster’s Section
Remains of previous victims litter the ground, but 
can be hard to spot beneath the greenery. There 
might even be an artifact here.
e ffect:  A PC who Scouts the area successfully will notice 
the bones of previous victims. Anyone who walks into the 
greenery must make a Move roll or be incapacitated by the 
powerful spores. Lying on the ground, the victim suffers one 
point of damage per turn until he is broken or until someone 
pulls him out (a Force roll). The Nightmare Flowers can only 
be destroyed by fire. Count the flowers’ combined Strength 
as 10. When it reaches zero, the flowers are dead and the 
area can be passed without risk.
PARASITE FUNGUS
This deadly fungoid life form infects its victims 
through mycelium at close contact with an infected 
body. The Parasite Fungus grows inside the host’s 
body and brain, with horrible pain as a result. The 
victim’s behavior is also affected.
±0
e ffect:  After the time of infection, the victim suffers one point 
of damage per day. This damage can be healed by rest and 
grub, but this will mean the victim needs to eat more to keep 
from being broken. If broken, the victim suffers a critical 
injury from non-typical damage (page 92).
At irregular intervals (whenever you want) the Parasite 
Fungus affects the victim’s brain in order to make it come 
close to another host, to keep spreading the infection. The 
victim needs to make a Wits roll (no skill can be used) to 
resist the impulse. The only way to be cured is to be broken 
by damage and then Healed.
RAZORBACK
A huge monster of a boar, standing taller than a 
mutant and angrier than a dozen. Despite its rather 
small legs, this beast can achieve an astonishing 
speed, and its rugged tusks can tear a car wreck 
apart. Anything seems to set the Razorback off on 
a killing frenzy, and stopping it is nigh impossible. 
The beast is not a predator and generally does not 
hunt to feed – instead in feeds on anything from 
corpses to Zone plants.
a ttributes:  Strength 10, Agility 6.
Skills:  Fight 4
a rm
or:  8
w ea
pons:  Charge (weapon damage 2 – this is a combined 
move/attack that must start at Short range and ends up at 
Arm’s Le

--- PAGE 183

13
1 8 1
Threats in the Zone
Rot: Any attack from Rot Ants, whether successful 
or not, inflicts one point for Rot on the victim.
Swarm:  The Rot Ants’ swarm is huge. It simply 
cannot be decimated by any weapons the PCs could 
conceivably get their hands on. The only way to 
survive is to run.
ROTFISH
In the murky waters of Zone lakes and rivers, the 
Rotfish lurk. This monster varies greatly in shape, 
from scaly flatfish to eel-like beasts with sharp fins. 
The Rotfish can attack swimmers or careless Zone 
travelers walking close to the waterline, and often 
pulls its prey down under water to drown it.
a ttributes:  Strength 7, Agility 5.
Skills:  Fight 3, Move 4 (underwater).
a rm
or:  5
w ea
pons:  Bite (weapon damage 2).
Drowning: In the turn after a successful Fight at-
tack, the Rotfish can pull its prey down under water 
to drown it. The victim will suffer one point of dam-
age per turn (unless Amphibian) and must make a 
Force roll to break free.
SCRAP CROWS
Big, ash-feathered birds that live in flocks in the 
Zone. They can attack Zone travelers careless 
enough to walk out in the open, hacking at the 
eyes with their sharp beaks. These Rot-ridden birds 
are called Scrap Crows by the People because they 
are attracted by anything shiny especially valuable 
scrap from the Old Age.
a ttributes:  Strength 7, Agility 6
a rm
or:  —
w ea
pons:  Beak and claws (weapon damage 1).
Swarm: Can only be harmed by fire or explosions.
±0
+1
TRASH HAWK
Perched on the roofs of tall ruins, the Trash Hawk 
watches the Zone for prey. Yellow and brown feath-
ers make it blend in well in the wasteland. This 
predatory bird has claws long and sharp as knives, 
and attack by quickly swooping down at its target 
and simply ripping off a large piece of flesh. If big 
enough, it even grabs its prey and flies off with it. 
Stalkers claim to have seen Trash Hawks with a 
wingspan of 25 feet.
a ttributes:  Strength 6, Agility 8.
Skills:  Fight 3, Sneak 4, Move 4, Force 2.
a rm
or:  1
w ea
pons:  Claws (weapon damage 2).
Swooping Attack: A Trash Hawk can swoop down 
from Long distance and Fight its target immedi-
ately. The bird takes one point of damage itself in 
the attack.
Lif

--- PAGE 184

13
1 8 2
GAmemaster’s Section
ZONE DOGS
Packs of ever hungry mutated mutts are common 
in the Zone. They are scrawny, wiry and often 
lack fur.
a ttributes:  Strength 4, Agility 6.
Skills:  Fight 2, Move 3.
a rm
or:  —
w ea
pons:  Bite (weapon damage 2).
ZONE RATS
These scrawny but unnervingly large rats live in 
hordes in the Zone. The Rot just seems to make 
them bigger and meaner. They are long as a 
mutant’s arm and will chew into any meat they 
come across, alive or dead, with their long, yellow  
teeth.
+1
+1
a ttributes:  Strength 8, Agility 5.
a rm
or:  —
w ea
pons:  Teeth (weapon damage 1).
Swarm:  Can only be damaged by fire or explosions.
Rot:  Every attack from a Zone Rat, whether success-
ful or not, inflicts a Rot Point on the target.
ZONE SPIDER
In dark tunnels and ruins, mutated spiders grown 
to absurd sizes dwell. Careless Zone travelers who 
step right through old decayed tunnel roofs or who 
explore ancient ruins can end up right in the mid-
dle of a nest. The Zone Spiders feed on anything 
from corpses and refuse to living prey that they first 
paralyze with their poisonous bite.
±0
Z ONE  R ATS



--- PAGE 185

13
1 8 3
Threats in the Zone
a ttributes:  Strength 5.
Skills:  Fight 2, Move 2.
a rm
or:  3
w ea
pons:  Bite (weapon damage 1 and poison).
Poison:  If the spider’s bite inflicts damage, the 
poison enters the victim’s body and causes one 
point of fatigue per turn until the victim is broken. 
A successful Heal roll (modification −2 if attempt-
ing it on oneself) to suck the poison out will stop 
the process.
ZONE WASPS
The first thing the victims hear is the buzzing 
sound, unnaturally deep and repulsive. The Zone 
Wasps are black and yellow like their ancestors in 
the Old Age, but big as fists and just as hard. Their 
sting injects a potent hallucinogenic poison that 
confuses the prey and makes it easier for the in-
sects to tear it apart. As if that was not bad enough, 
in combat the Zone Wasps emit pheromones that 
alert other Zone Wasps nearby, quickly swelling 
their numbers.
a ttributes:  Strength 5.
a rm
or:  2
w ea
pons:  Bite (weapon damage 1).
Hallucinogenic Poison:  All attacks that give the 
victim one or more points of damage also inflicts 
one point of confusion.
Pheromones:  The Strength of the swarm increases 
one step every turn until the victims are either dead 
or have escaped.
Swarm: The Zone Wasps can only be damaged by 
fire or explosions.
ZONE LEECHES
Fist-sized critters that dwell in thick undergrowth 
or in dark ruins, sensing the heat of passing prey 
±0
±0
and falling onto it. These slimy beasts have nei-
ther legs nor eyes, only a maw ringed by small and 
sharp teeth. If a leech lands on a living being, it 
immediately bites into the flesh and starts sucking 
blood out at an alarming rate. A dozen leeches can 
completely drain a grown mutant.
a ttributes:  Strength 6.
a rm
or:  —
w ea
pons:  Bite (weapon damage 1). If the initial attack is 
successful, the leeches attach to their victim, which will suffer 
one more point of damage every turn until the leeches are 
removed. To pull or cut off the leeches from someone requires 
a successful Fight roll. Doing it on yourself is possible, but 
gives a −2 modification.
Swarm: Zone Leeches can only be hurt by fire or 
explosions.
Z ONE  L EECHES



--- PAGE 186

13
1 8 4
GAmemaster’s Section
PHENOMENA
The very foundations of the world have been shaken 
by the great Apocalypse. Weapons of mass destruc-
tion and extreme scientific experimentation have 
had a profound impact on nature as we know it. 
Phenomena  is the umbrella term for strange, bizarre 
and positively lethal non-living threats that Zone 
travelers can encounter.
ACID RAIN
Heavy raindrops start to fall from the Zone sky. But 
this is no ordinary rain. The strongly acidic drops 
burn whatever they land on, and the PCs need to seek 
cover. When the Acid Rain is over (after D6 hours), 
everything in the area is pockmarked by the acid 
drops, and puddles of burning acid cover the ground.
e ffect:  Anyone caught in the Acid Rain suffers an attack with 
a number of Base Dice determined by the intensity of the rain 
– 6 is normal, but anything from 4 to 10 is possible. Every / 
rolled inflicts one point of damage. Armor works normally. 
The victims suffer one attack like this per turn until they man-
age to find a shelter that protects them from the rain – this 
normally requires a Move roll.
ASH STORM
A strong gale sweeps across the Zone, whipping up 
the ashes that lie in droves among the ruins. The 
ash cloud reduces visibility to a few feet, stings the 
eyes and makes it hard to breathe. After a few hours, 
when the air finally clears, everything is covered in 
a fine layer of ash.
e ffect:  Zone travelers who want to push on in the Ash Storm 
need to make an Endure roll. A failed roll means the travelers 
must stop and find shelter. The storm lasts D6 hours.
DUST TORNADO
The wind suddenly picks up and the air is filled 
by sand and ashes. Around the PCs, black twirl-
ing funnels of tornados appear. Suddenly, and old 
house is pulled apart by a black twister, moving 
right toward the PCs.
+1
+1
−1
e ffect:  Anyone in the path of the Dust Tornado needs to make 
a Move roll to get away in time. Failure results in an attack 
with 12 Base Dice (weapon damage 1). Cover and armor 
have their normal effect.
GHOST LIGHTS
A pale green shimmering light moves among the 
ruins or trees in the area. If anyone tries to get close 
to the light, it moves away, as if aware if

--- PAGE 187

13
1 8 5
Threats in the Zone
Comment: Use this phenomenon only in summer. 
In the wintertime, use Temperature Drop instead.
INERTIA FIELD
Some distance away, the PCs spot a monster or a 
humanoid who seems completely frozen in the mid-
dle of a motion. If anyone moves closer, others see 
how this person seems to move in slow motion. In 
this area, there is a strange force field that makes 
time itself slow down. To anyone moving into the 
field, the outside world seems to move more quickly. 
The effect increases further into the field. It is pos-
sible to talk to someone inside of the field, but to 
him the voices will speak very quickly and be very 
shrill. His own voice will be slow to persons outside 
of the field.
e ffect:  Being at the outer rim of the field is not dangerous, 
but anyone moving toward its center risks being caught in 
it forever. Let a PC who moves into the field (or who seems 
someone else caught in it) roll to Know the Zone. If successful, 
the PC realizes the risk.
MAGNETIC FIELD
The remains of some sort of ancient underground 
power plant creates a strong magnetic field in this 
area. The PCs hear a low humming sound and get 
goosebumps on their skin. If they linger in the area, 
they will feel metal objects being pulled toward a 
particular point.
e ffect:  The PCs must either drop all metal objects that they 
are carrying, or make a Force roll to get out of the Mag-
netic Field with their metal gear. Anyone wearing scrap 
armor must make a Force roll, it’s not possible to get out 
of the armor fast enough. Anyone who fails the roll can 
try again in the next turn, but with a −1 modification. The 
modification grows to −2 in the third turn, etc. Suddenly 
and inexplicably (whenever you decide), the Magnetic Field 
dissipates.
MIRAGE
The terrain close to the PCs suddenly blurs and 
deforms. It changes appearance completely and 
−1
−1
−1



--- PAGE 188

13
1 8 6
GAmemaster’s Section
now looks like it did in the Old Age – no decay, 
no debris, everything clean and orderly. The PCs 
have walked into a hologram, the remains of ancient 
defensive perimeter.
e ffect:  The PCs risk bumping into things that they cannot see, 
and therefore must act as if in total darkness (page 93). The 
hologram is approximately 50 feet across.
MUD PUDDLES
This foggy area is covered by large puddles of 
thick, warm mud. There is solid ground under-
neath the mud, but it will reach to the knees of 
anyone who walks through the puddles. In addi-
tion, there are hidden wells of steaming hot water 
in some places. Walking through the area risks 
triggering geysers of hot water, scalding everyone 
nearby.
e ffect:  A PC who successfully Scouts the area will notice 
bubbles and steam coming out of the mud at certain loca-
tions. Wading through the area requires a Know the Zone 
roll – failure means triggering a steam geyser. Roll six Base 
Dice to attack everyone within Near distance. Every / rolled 
inflicts one point of damage. Armor has the normal effect. 
Anyone who suffers one or more points of damage also gets 
one Rot Point. Staying in this area has one useful effect – the 
hot steam keeps the area warm, and thus protects against 
severe cold (page 93).
NIGHT LIGHTS
Huge, billowing lights in sickly colors fill the night 
sky. Artifacts and other gear that run on electricity 
start to work erratically, or not at all. Some see a 
bad omen in these lights, others the sign of a new 
dawn for the world. Some just find the lights pretty. 
The lights last until morning.
e ffect:  All electric artifacts (such as the Flashlight, Cassette 
Player, and Video Camera) won’t work properly as long as 
the Night Lights linger.
Comment: If you roll up this phenomenon in the 
daytime, have the Night Lights appear the follow-
ing evening.
±0
−1
OBELISK
In the middle of wasteland, the tall black Obelisk 
stands. It seems to be made of some kind of very 
durable metal. The PCs cannot find any visible 
hatches or slits in the metal, and the Obelisk seems 
to be completely untouched by the passage of time. 
The Obelisk seems alien to the PCs, and it can e

--- PAGE 189

13
1 8 7
Threats in the Zone
e ffect:  Give the players a chance to notice that something 
is amiss, such as a number of cadavers on the ground or a 
pipe leaking green sludge. Anyone who proceeds despite the 
warning signs suffers one Rot Point per minute in the area.
ROT WIND
A wind carrying foul Rot-ridden fumes sweep across 
the sector. The air is filled by dust and a sickening 
stench.
e ffect:  The Rot Wind immediately inflicts one Rot Points on 
every person caught in it. In addition, any water or grub car-
ried by the PCs will be contaminated by Rot, inflicting one Rot 
Point per ration consumed. The Rot Wind lasts D6 hours.
SINKHOLE
The ground suddenly gives in, and a huge hole into 
the ground or into some ancient underground facil-
ity opens up.
e ffect:  Anyone close to the collapse must make a Move roll to 
avoid falling into the Sinkhole. Doing so inflicts one point of 
damage in itself – and can expose the victim to any number 
of underground threats, such as monsters or Rot. Climbing up 
can also be difficult, usually requiring a Move roll.
TEMPERATURE DROP
Suddenly, the wind picks up, the temperature drops 
and a heavy snowfall starts. Then, the wind and 
the snowing stops. A wall of white clouds forms 
a tall cylinder right above the PCs. A crystal blue 
sky can be seen above. The serenity comes with a 
cost – the temperature drops dramatically. Exposure 
can be lethal.
e ffect:  Any Zone travelers caught out in the open must imme-
diately roll to Endure severe cold (page 93). One roll every 
15 minutes is required, until the cold spot passes (after D6 
hours) or the PCs move out of the sector. Lighting a fire can 
keep the cold at bay, but it requires firewood and an Agility 
roll (no skill used).
Comment:  Use this phenomenon only in winter. In 
the summertime, use Heat Wave instead.
±0
±0
±0
UNEXPLODED ORDNANCE
This entire area is scarred by gunshots and explo-
sions. In the ground, mines and/ or unexploded gre-
nades and bombs are hidden. Walking through this 
area is very dangerous.
e ffect:  Anyone who walks through the area must make a 
Move roll. Failure means triggering a Blast Power 6 explo-
sion at Arm’s Length (page 94).
VACUUM
The

--- PAGE 190





--- PAGE 191

14
1 8 9
ARTIFACTS
14
ARTIFACTS
Artifacts are the most valuable things the PCs can 
find. These rare functional items from the Old Age 
can give them power over other mutants, bring 
knowledge to the People, and even show the way 
to Eden.
The text on all of the Artifact Cards in the Mu-
tant: Year Zero Card Deck  is repeated here, and 
some of the more intricate artifacts are described 
in more detail.
How PCs can find and understand how to use 
artifacts is explained in Chapter 8.
HANDLING ARTIFACTS
You as GM decide when and where a PC may find 
an artifact. When the PCs explore a new sector in 
the Zone a Stalker can use the Find the Path skill to 
find artifacts, but remember that you are not bound 
by this roll. You can also let the PCs find artifacts in 
other places, like in a settlement or carried by an NPC.
Use artifacts as a reward for exploration, but 
also to create drama and tension within and around 
the group of PCs. Artifacts are powerful and valu-
able things – whoever finds an artifact will gain 
influence over others, but also risks becoming a 
target for NPCs or other PCs.
THE ARTIFACT CARDS
Normally, you let the player who finds an artifact 
draw an Artifact Card or roll on the artifact table 
below. If you want to root the artifact more firmly 
in the environment, you can draw the card without 
showing it and describe the surroundings, before 
handing the card over. A third option is that you 
simply choose which artifact a PC finds.
The title on the Artifact Card (or the entry on 
the table) tells you what the artifact is, while the rest 
of the text describes the item without mentioning 
its name. When a PC gets an Artifact Card, have the 
player first read the description without revealing 
the headline. It’s fun for the other players to guess 
what the artifact is before it is revealed. That the 
players realize what an artifact is doesn’t mean that 
the PCs do.
THE ARTIFACT TABLE
If you don’t have access to the Mutant: Year 
Zero Card Deck , you can roll D666 on this 
table instead of drawing a card to randomly 
determine what artifact a PC finds.
D666 a rt ifact
111–114 Air Mattress
115–122 Antidepressants
123–126 Assault Rifle
131–1

--- PAGE 192

14
1 9 0
GAmemaster’s Section
D666 a rt ifact
135–142 Battery
143–146 Bicycle
151–154 Binoculars
155–162 Bow & Arrow
163–166 Canoe
211–214 Cassette Player (Metaplot)
215–222 Chainsaw
223–226 Comic Book
231–234 Compass
235–242 Crossbow
243–246 Diary
251–254 Diving Gear
255–262 Dress
263–266 Energy Pills
311–314 Flashlight
315–322 Flare Gun
323–326 Gas Mask
331–334 Generator
335–342 Guitar
343–346 Hand Grenade
351–354 Hockey Helmet
355–362 Hunting Rifle
363–366 ID Card (Metaplot)
411–414 Jerrycan
415–422 Katana
423–426 Kevlar Vest
431–434 Lifestyle Magazine
435–442 Map of the Zone
443–446 Motor Boat
451–454 Painkillers
455–462 Painting
463–466 Perfume Bottle
511–514 Protective Suit
515–522 REGEN
523–526 Revolver
531–534 Scooter
535–542 Semi-Automatic Pistol
543–546 Shotgun
551–554 Smoke Grenade
D666 a rt ifact
555–562 Soda Can
563–566 Stimulants
611–614 Sunglasses
615–622 Tuxedo
623–626 Umbrella
631–634 Video Camera (Metaplot)
635–642 Wrench
643–666 Re-Roll
THE DAWN VAULT
Any mutant who finds an artifact is supposed to 
hand it over to the Dawn Vault, for the good of the 
People (page 113). These days, far from all mutants 
follow that rule, but the general principle is still 
there and helps the development of the Ark – each 
artifact handed in gives a bonus to the Ark’s DEV 
level. Use this to place PCs in moral dilemmas – 
should they help themselves or act for the common 
good?
KK AIR MATTRESS
This inflatable old bed offers unbeatable sleeping 
comfort! It’s dirty and worn, and hard to inflate if 
you don’t know how to do it.
Effect: Sleeping on the air mattress is very effec-
tive. A single hour is enough to recover all of 
your lost Wits (page 90).
DEV Requirement: Technology 10  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
KK ANTIDEPRESSANTS
When life in the Zone feels dark and hopeless, these 
little pills in a plastic bottle can give you chemical 
relief.
Effect: When eating these pills, you immediately 
heal all doubt that you have suffered. Unfor-
tunately, there are only enough pills left for 
D6 doses. When you have consumed them all, 
you must discard this artifact. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20  
DEV 
Bonus: —



--- PAGE 193

14
1 9 1
ARTIFACTS
KK ASSAULT RIFLE
A rusty but awe-inspiring weapon, capable of un-
leashing a hail of bullets at your enemies. Bullets 
are usually far too valuable to waste in this way, 
but the weapon itself will give you respect among 
the People.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to Shoot. Weapon dam-
age 2, Long range. Has a clip, which means 
that you don’t need to reload after every shot. 
Capable of full automatic fire (page 86).
DEV Requirement: Technology 20 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +D6
KK AUTOMOBILE
This motor-driven carriage is s rust-ridden wreck, 
but it can be repaired. With a successful Jury-Rig 
roll, a Gearhead can get it running again. The en-
gine can run on gasoline or on booze (one dose per 
Zone sector traveled).
Effect: The car can carry five mutants, increases 
the movement rate in combat and cuts the 
time it takes to explore a sector in the Zone 
by half. It can also be used to escape from 
threats or to ram enemies. How vehicles work 
is fully explained on page 94. Gear Bonus: +3. 
Armor Rating: 3. Resilience: 1.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK BATTERY
A heavy lump of metal that the Old Ones used to 
connect to machines to make them work. There still 
seems to be some power in it…
Effect: Used to power other artifacts that require 
electrical power. Can be recharged with a 
Generator (the artifact or the project).
DEV Requirement: Technology 10  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
KK BICYCLE
This rust-infested old vehicle from the Old Age is 
simple yet ingenious in its design. It has two thin 
wheels, a handlebar and pedals. The rubber tires 
are thick and rugged – perfect for navigating the 
Zone terrain.
Effect: The bicycle can carry one mutant, in-
creases the movement rate in combat and 
cuts the time it takes to explore a sector in 
the Zone by half. It can also be used to es-
cape from threats. How vehicles work is fully 
explained on page 94. Gear Bonus: +2. Resil-
ience: 1.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK BINOCULARS
A strange metal object made of two connected tubes 
with pieces of glass inside each. If you look through 
the tubes, everything around you looks much big-
ger. Us

--- PAGE 194

14
1 9 2
GAmemaster’s Section
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Scout and Find the 
Path skills. Light item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK BOW & ARROW
The People can create bows, but not like this one. 
It is constructed in some type of ancient material, 
and packs a massive punch.
Effect: Gear Bonus +2 to the Shoot skill. Weapon 
damage 1, Long range. Needs arrows.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV Bonus: Technology +1, Warfare +1
KK CANOE
A strange, oblong vehicle made of dented metal. It 
has two seats and two plastic paddles tucked away 
underneath.
Effect: The canoe can carry up to four mutants 
over water and can be used to explore coastal 
sectors of the Zone. It can be used to escape 
from threats on water, and gives a +2 Gear 
Bonus to the Move skill in such situations. 
Resilience: 1.
DEV Requirement: —
 
 
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +1
KK CASSETTE PLAYER (METAPLOT)
A cracked and yellowed plastic contraption with 
buttons and knobs and a lid along one side. Inside, 
there is a piece of plastic with two holes in it. On 
top of the device a thin metal rod is mounted.
Effect: Requires a Battery or Generator (the arti-
fact or the project) to work. Can play music 
from the Old Age and receive radio signals, if 
anyone is still transmitting…
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Culture +D6
Comment: This artifact can help the PCs find 
Eden. Read more in Chapter 16.
KK CHAINSAW
This rattling monster of a contraption can be 
wielded as a melee weapon to horrible effect. But 
starting the engine takes a full turn and requires a 
dose of gasoline or booze.
Effect: Wielded as a weapon, the chainsaw gives 
you a +2 Gear Bonus and has weapon damage 
3. Heavy item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK COMIC BOOK
A booklet made of brittle old paper from the Old 
Age. You can hardly turn the yellowed pages with-
out tearing them apart. They show images of mus-
cular men and women in tights, fighting each other. 
The fashion sense during the Old Age was clearly 
very odd.
Effect: None. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK COMPASS
A piece of plastic with a dial on it. A needle spins 
and points i

--- PAGE 195

14
1 9 3
ARTIFACTS
Effect: The compass gives you Gear Bonus +2 to 
the Find the Path skill.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK CROSSBOW
A silent and deadly ancient weapon, made of a 
light-weight metal. Easier to aim and fire than a 
normal bow.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Shoot skill. Weapon 
damage 1, Long range. Uses arrows, not 
bullets.
DEV Requirement: Technology 5
DEV Bonus: Technology +1, Warfare +1
KK DIARY
A worn notebook with hand-written text on the 
waterlogged pages. If you can read the Old Ones’ 
script, you can make out what it says.
Effect: This artifact connects to the game’s meta-
plot. Read more about it in Chapter 16.
DEV Requirement: Culture 20  
DEV 
Bonus: Culture +D6
KK DIVING GEAR
A full-body suit in a rubbery material from the Old 
Age. The strange suit comes with shoes like the 
feet of a frog, a plastic facemask and a rusted metal 
cylinder with tubes and gauges.
Effect: Heavy item. It gives you Gear Bonus +3 
to using the Move skill underwater. It also 
HOW MANY ARTIFACTS?
Don’t let the PCs find too many artifacts 
too soon. Artifacts should be rare and val-
uable. As a general rule, don’t let the PCs 
find more than one or two artifacts per 
session, in total. You can let some NPCs 
have artifacts, but that should also be a 
rare occurrence – NPCs’ artifacts have a 
tendency to end up in the hands of the 
PCs. And if the PCs still would come a 
across a large amount of artifacts – re-
member that others will try to get their 
hands on them…
protects you against gases and gives you 
Protection Rating 3 against the Rot.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK DRESS
A large and wide piece of clothing in thin, ancient 
cloth that still glitters despite decades of dirt and 
dust. The cloth hardly covers your upper body at 
all, but hangs around your legs and makes it hard 
to walk. Very impractical – but pretty.
Effect: Gear Bonus +2 to Manipulate. Does not 
count as an item when you wear it.
DEV Requirement: Culture 10
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK ENERGY PILLS
The pills in this bottle will quickly give you your 
energy back when you’re exhausted.
Effect: When eating these pills, you immediate

--- PAGE 196

14
1 9 4
GAmemaster’s Section
KK GAS MASK
This crusty old black rubber mask covers your en-
tire face and has a big filter in front of your mouth. 
The mask is worn and scratched, but still works.
Effect: Light item. Protects you against gases and 
gives you Protection rating 3 against the Rot.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
KK GENERATOR
A heavy, rusty old machine that seems completely 
worthless at first glance. But a Gearhead knows that 
this contraption is worth its weight in gold. If you 
fill it up with fuel it can generate electrical power.
Effect: Heavy item. Requires one dose of booze 
per day. Can power other artifacts or projects.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK GUITAR
A strange and brittle wooden contraption with 
strings stretched across a hole in the middle. 
Against all odds it has survived the Apocalypse 
with hardly a scratch, and if you pull on the strings, 
beautiful sounds are heard.
Effect: If you learn to play the guitar, you’ll be 
popular around the campfire. Provides +3 
Gear Bonus to Manipulate, but only in situa-
tions where you get a chance to play.
DEV Requirement: Culture 20  
DEV 
Bonus: Culture +D6
KK HAND GRENADE
A rusty metal lump that explodes with a deafening 
bang if you pull the pin out. Handle with caution!
Effect: Light item. You throw the grenade using 
the Shoot skill. It has no Gear Bonus and the 
range is Short. If the attack succeeds, the gre-
nade lands within Near range of the target, if 
not it lands within Short range. The explosion 
has Blast Power 9 and weapon damage 2.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +D6
KK HOCKEY HELMET
An ancient piece of headgear made of blue plastic. 
It’s a little cracked and worn, but still provides solid 
protection for your head.
Effect: Protection Rating 3 against damage.
DEV Requirement: —
 
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +1
KK HUNTING RIFLE
This long firearm is worn and scratched, but its 
great firepower and range will make sure you are 
feared in the Zone.
Effect: Gear Bonus +2 to Shoot. Weapon damage 
2, Long range. Has a clip, which means that 
you don’t need to reload after every shot.
DEV Requir

--- PAGE 197

14
1 9 5
ARTIFACTS
Comment: This artifact can help the PCs into 
Eden. Read more in Chapter 16.
KK JERRYCAN
A rusted but intact metal jerrycan filled with fuel, 
which stinks and is very flammable. The fuel can 
power up ancient vehicles again – or be used as a 
firebomb.
Effect: The fuel can be used to fill up the tanks 
of old vehicles (page 94). If used as a weapon, 
you light a fuse stuffed into the nozzle and 
then throw the can with the Force skill. No 
Gear Bonus, Short range. If the attack suc-
ceeds, the can lands within Near range of 
the target, if not it lands at Short range. The 
explosion has Blast Power 6.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +1
KK KATANA
In a crumbling sheath lies a long, thin sword. It 
feels good in your hand and the blade is still sharp 
– very sharp.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Fight skill. Weapon 
damage 2.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK KEVLAR VEST
This heavy vest already has some holes in it, but 
still gives you great protection from bullets and 
others attacks.
Effect: Armor Rating 6 against damage from 
external attacks.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6



--- PAGE 198

14
1 9 6
GAmemaster’s Section
KK LIFESTYLE MAGAZINE
A thick bundle of waterlogged paper that once was 
glossy. On the front cover and everywhere inside 
the magazine, there are pictures of the Old Ones. 
They all smile and look healthy and happy. Their 
homes are bright and beautiful, their motor car-
riages shine in the sunlight. Between the pictures, 
texts describe what life was like in the Old Age. It 
must have been heaven.
Effect: None. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: —  
DEV 
Bonus: Culture +D6
KK MAP OF THE ZONE
This brittle and torn map shows what the Zone 
looked like in the Old Age. It is very valuable to a 
Stalker to navigate among the ruins, but can also 
bring valuable knowledge to the People.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to Find the Path. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: Culture 10
 
DEV 
Bonus: Culture +D6
KK MOTOR BOAT
A dinghy in cracked and dirty plastic. It still seems 
to float. It has an outboard motor, but to make it 
run again a Gearhead needs to make a Jury-Rig 
roll. The motor can run on gasoline or booze (one 
dose per sector traveled in the Zone).
Effect: The boat can carry up to seven mutants, 
increases the movement speed in combat 
and cuts the time it takes to explore a coastal 
Zone sector by half. It can also be used to 
escape from threats or to ram enemies at sea. 
How vehicles work is fully explained on page 
94. Gear Bonus: +3. Resilience: 2.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
KK PAINKILLERS
These little pills quickly numb the pain from your 
wounds and bruises.
Effect: On eating these pills, you immediately 
heal all damage points that you have suffered. 
They have no effect against critical injuries. 
There are only enough pills left for D6 doses. 
When you have consumed them all, you must 
discard this artifact. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20 
 
DEV 
Bonus: —
KK PAINTING
A large piece of art in a wooden frame. The image 
shows a skinny man on a bridge, holding his hands 
to his face and screaming. The Old Ones were truly 
a strange lot. This artifact is of no obvious use, but 
you can always use it to adorn the walls in your 
den – or hand it in to the Dawn Vault.
Effect: None.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV

--- PAGE 199

14
1 9 7
ARTIFACTS
KK REVOLVER
A gun made of heavy steel, resting comfortably in 
your hand. The weapon is a little rusty, but still in 
surprisingly good condition. It’s easy to use too.
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Shoot skill. Weapon 
damage 2, Short range. Has a drum that can 
be loaded with several bullets, so you don’t 
need to reload after every bullet fired.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +1
KK SCOOTER
Two wheels, an engine and a rusted handle – the 
perfect Zone vehicle. To make the scooter opera-
tional a Gearhead must first make a roll for the 
Jury-Rig skill. The engine can run on gasoline or 
on booze (one dose per two Zone sectors traveled).
Effect: The scooter can carry two mutants, in-
creases the movement speed in combat and 
cuts the time it takes to explore a sector in 
the Zone by half. It can also be used to es-
cape from threats or to ram enemies. How 
vehicles work is fully explained on page 94. 
Gear Bonus: +2. Resilience: 1.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK SEMI-AUTOMATIC PISTOL
A light-weight and easily concealable handgun, 
small enough to hide in your sleeve. Very handy 
in a tight spot.
Effect: Light item. Gear Bonus +2 to the Shoot 
skill. Weapon damage 2, Short range. Has a 
clip, meaning you don’t need to reload after 
every shot.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +1
KK SHOTGUN
A sawed-off firearm with two heavy barrels. At close 
range it is a fearsome weapon that inspires awe in 
every mutant in the Ark.
Effect: Light item. Gear Bonus +3 to the Shoot 
skill. Weapon damage 3, Short range. Can be 
fired twice before it needs to be reloaded.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10 
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6, Warfare +1
KK SMOKE GRENADE
With a hissing noise, this old metal tube spews 
out black smoke that blocks vision. You can use 
this effect to escape from a fight that is going 
against you.
Effect: You can use the smoke grenade to escape 
from conflict (page 81) instead of using the 
Move skill. You can even roll first and use the 
grenade if the roll fails.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +1, Warfare +1
KK SODA CAN
A red

--- PAGE 200

14
1 9 8
GAmemaster’s Section
KK STIMULANTS
These tiny white pills look unimposing, but if you 
eat them they will immediately sharpen your senses 
and make you very alert. You might not sleep for 
a few days though.
Effect: When eating these pills, you immediately 
heal all confusion points that you have suf-
fered. There are only enough pills left for D6 
doses. When you have consumed them all, 
you must discard this artifact. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: Technology 20
DEV Bonus: —
KK SUNGLASSES
A pair of glasses with darkened lenses. The glass is 
scratched but intact and covers your eyes – a useful 
edge in tough negotiations.
Effect: Gear Bonus to the Manipulate and Intimi-
date skills. Tiny item.
DEV Requirement: —
DEV Bonus: Culture + 1
KK TUXEDO
A set of clothes with a black jacket, pants and a shirt. 
On the front of the shirt, a wrinkled strip of cloth 
hangs. These ancient clothes will impress everyone 
around you.
Effect: Gear Bonus +2 to Manipulate. Does not 
count as an item when you wear it.
DEV Requirement: Culture 10
DEV Bonus: Culture +D6
KK UMBRELLA
With a simple motion you can unfold this contrap-
tion to create a protective dome of cloth and metal 
– useful against the Rot and the acid rain in the Zone.
Effect: Protection Rating 3 against the Rot (page 
126).
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
KK VIDEO CAMERA (METAPLOT)
A fist-sized device with a tube at one end. Along the 
side, there are several buttons and a small screen 
that can be folded out. This contraption needs a 
Generator or a Battery to work (artifact or project).
Effect: This device can record moving images 
and sound. Perhaps something is already 
recorded on it?
DEV Requirement: Technology 30  
DEV 
Bonus: Technology +D6
Comment: This artifact can help the PCs find the 
way to Eden. Read more in Chapter 16.
KK WRENCH
A heavy metal tool from the Old Age, rusted but 
worth its weight in gold for Gearheads. Useful for 
bludgeoning other mutants too.



--- PAGE 201

14
1 9 9
ARTIFACTS
w ea P on b on u S Da M ag e r an ge c o MM en t
Assault Rifle +3 2 Long Clip, Full-Auto.
Chainsaw +2 3 Arm’s Length Heavy item.
Compound Bow +2 1 Long
Crossbow +3 1 Long
Flare Gun +2 2 Short
Hunting Rifle +2 2 Long Clip.
Katana +3 2 Arm’s Length
Revolver +3 2 Short Clip.
Semi-Auto Pistol +2 2 Short Clip, light item.
Shotgun +2 3 Short Two barrels.
v ehicle b on u S a r M or r e S il ience o cc u P an t S
Bicycle  +2 * —  1  1
Sc
ooter +2 —  1  2
Mo
torcycle +3 —  1  2
Bu
ggy +2 2  2  3
Au
tomobile +3 3  2  5
Bu
s +2 3  5 40
T
ruck +2 6  5  4
St
eam Car (page 111) +1 3  3 10
C
anoe  +2
* —  1  4
Mo
torboat +3 1  2  7
Sc
rap Ship (page 109)  +1
* 6 20 50
Steam Train (page 112)  +1
* 3 15 50
Effect: Gear Bonus +3 to the Jury-Rig skill and +2 
to the Fight skill. Weapon damage 1.
DEV Requirement: Technology 10
DEV Bonus: Technology +D6
OTHER ARTIFACTS
There are 50 artifacts in this book. Considering that 
the PCs shouldn’t find more than one or two arti-
facts per session, these 50 should suffice for quite a 
number of sessions. More artifacts will be published 
in future expansions, and you are of course free to 
make up more yourself – just be careful not to make 
them too powerful.
WEAPONS & VEHICLES
Weapons and vehicles are two types of artifacts that 
are especially sought after in the dawnworld. Some 
are included in the Artifact Cards. These and others 
can be found in the tables below.
Bonus:  The number of Gear Dice that a weapon 
gives to the Shoot or Fight skill, and a vehicle gives 
to the Move or the Fight skill (when ramming an 
enemy, see page 95). Some vehicles cannot be used 
to ram – these are marked with an asterisk (*).
Resilience: The number of points of damage that 
needs to be inflicted on a vehicle before its Gear 
Bonus is reduced one step.
Armor:  The Armor Rating that the vehicle provides 
to all passengers in the vehicle.
Occupants:  The number of people who can fit into 
or onto the vehicle, including the driver.



--- PAGE 202





--- PAGE 203

15
2 0 1
Special Zone Sectors
15
Special 
Zone Sectors
This chapter describes five Special Zone Sectors 
that you can place anywhere in the Zone. They 
are complete scenario locations and contain 
NPCs, conflicts and the events that PCs can get 
involved in.
Each Special Zone Sector stands on its own, 
but you can link them together to create longer 
scenarios if you like. Several of them are also con-
nected to Threat Cards (Chapter 10), and some of 
them have suggestions about where clues to Eden 
can be placed for the PCs to find. Each Special 
Zone Sector has a map overview, shown in two 
versions:
 K The GM map has small inset pictures show-
ing the important locations in the sector.
 K The player map lacks these inset pictures, 
and can therefore be shown to the players 
openly when the PCs arrive to the sector. The 
player maps sit at the end of the chapter, and 
can also be downloaded from the Modiphius 
website.
FOR A MOUTHFUL OF WATER
The lack of grub and Rot-free water is an ever 
present threat in Mutant: Year Zero . This Special 
Zone Sector is focused on the second of these two 
vital resources. Somewhere out in the Zone there 
is a rich source of clean water, worth more than its 
weight in gold to the People – and to other groups 
in the Zone.
This sector can be used early in your campaign, 
as it introduces several central elements of the 
game: the shortage of resources, the Zone-Ghouls 
and the search for Eden. This Special Zone Sector 
can even be used as the starting point for the entire 
game (see the boxed text).
INTRODUCTORY SCENARIO
For a Mouthful of Water works well as an 
introduction to Mutant: Year Zero . The game 
then doesn’t start in the Ark, but rather with 
the PCs already on a Zone expedition. Pick 



--- PAGE 204

15
2 0 2
GAmemaster's Section
a sector on the Zone map 5–6 squares away 
from the Ark – that’s where the PCs are when 
the game starts. Add one or two NPCs to the 
expedition too. If none of the PCs are a Dog 
Handler and none have the Tracker mutation, 
an NPC should have that role or mutation. To 
kick the game off, read or paraphrase this 
text to your players:
“The most precious resource of all in the Ark 
is something that we take for granted – clean 
water. Some time ago, the Ark’s water supply 
started to dry up. The People were getting 
scared and edgy. Two weeks ago, the Boss 
NN [insert the name of a Boss that the players 
have established during the character gen-
eration] decided to send an expedition into 
the Zone. The mission was meant to explore 
an ancient ruin that the Stalkers claim has an 
endless supply of clean water. They called it 
the Pure Plant. The problem was that the area 
was crawling with Zone-Ghouls. Several days 
passed, but the expedition did not return as 
planned. Two days ago, NN sent out another 
group of volunteers to search for the first expe-
dition. You are these volunteers. For the past 
two days, you have trekked through the Zone. 
You have survived acid rain, been attacked 
by Zone Rats and hidden from Zone-Ghouls. 
Now, on the morning of the third day, you are 
approaching the Pure Plant…”
OVERVIEW
In the distance, huge tanks and thick rusty pipes 
rise from the wasteland. In the middle is a tall, con-
crete tower, still standing after decades of decay. 
When the PCs come closer, they realize the Pure 
Plant is located on a small island in a mist-covered 
lake (or bay, depending on where in the Zone you 
have placed the sector). The island is about 100 
yards from the shoreline. Apart from the tanks, 
pipes and pools, several low ruined buildings can be 
seen on the island, which is overgrown with weeds.
In the Old Age, this installation was a water pu-
rification plant. The entire island is penetrated by 
tunnels and underground reservoirs with water of dif-
ferent Rot levels. Thanks to maintenance work done 
by the Zone-Ghouls (below) the plant actually still 
works, and still pumps out clean water into the lake.


--- PAGE 205

15
2 0 3
Special Zone Sectors
Tunnels:  Service tunnels penetrate the entire island. 
Having lived here for years, the Zone-Ghouls know 
these passages very well. There is a tunnel leading 
from the control room building to the reservoirs, 
but the water expedition members have not dared 
go down there. In this tunnel, there is a solid metal 
door that can be closed and locked with a success-
ful Force roll.
THE SITUATION
When the Apocalypse came, the purification plant 
stayed operational, thanks to an internal emergency 
power plant and a group of workers who chose to 
stay. Thanks to the clean water they survived, but 
they could not completely escape the Rot. During 
the generations that followed, they turned into what 
the People now call Zone-Ghouls. They are very ter-
ritorial and their leader Lutrell views any visitors 
to the island as threats.
The first water expedition from the Ark got into 
trouble the instant they set foot on the island. Their 
leader, the Stalker Vorhan, was attacked by the 
Trash Hawk and carried off to the nest at the top of 
the smokestack. The noise alerted the Zone-Ghouls, 
who attacked the intruders. After a brief but bloody 
battle the visitors sought refuge in the control room, 
where they have now barricaded themselves and 
don’t dare go out. The Zone-Ghouls are planning 
a final attack.
INHABITANTS
Today approximately 50 Zone-Ghouls live on the 
island, half adults and half children. Most of them 
have typical stats (page 176), only their leader 
Lutrell is described in more detail below. The water 
FAMILIAR NPCs?
If you like, you can replace the three 
NPCs from the first water expedition with 
NPCs that the PCs have relationships to. 
This will make the interaction more inter-
esting. If this is the first time these NPCs 
appear in the game, you can just change 
their names and use the stats as written.
expedition from the Ark has been decimated since 
it arrived to the island – the leader Vorhan was taken 
by the Trash Hawk, and two others were killed by 
the Zone-Ghouls. The three that remain – Nelma, 
Grit and Lambda – are scared and very hostile to 
the Zone-Ghouls.
Nelma: After Vorhan’s death, the Enforcer Nelma 


--- PAGE 206

15
T HE  R ESERVOIRS
2 0 4
GAmemaster's Section
The Pure Plant
Lutrell  is the leader of the Zone-Ghouls on the 
island, who call themselves the “Pure Ones”. 
Lutrell is a man who lives and dies by upholding 
the ancient traditions: the daily water measure-
ments with litmus paper, the bathing in Tank 3A 
every evening, the cleaning of the water filters. 
Traditions have kept the Pure Ones alive and will 
continue to do so, Lutrell believes. Intruders on 
the island are not welcome. However, Lutrell is no 
fanatic. If the PCs try to negotiate with him, he 
might make a deal. He can even consider giving 
the People access to the clean water – if given 
something substantial in return, of course. The 
Pure Ones all wear worn plastic coveralls, and 
most of them use protective face masks whenever 
they leave the reservoirs.
a ttributes:  Strength 3, Agility 3, Wits 5, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Fight 2, Shoot 3, Move 2, Manipulate 2.
g ea
r:  Scrap knife, bow (seven arrows), old litmus papers, 
torn wetsuit.
The Trash Hawk  has its nest at the top of the 
smokestack, but it’s often out hunting. Normal stats 
(page 181).
The Worm Swarm in the pool hall is a huge speci-
men with a starting Strength score of 10. Otherwise 
it has typical stats (page 181). The Zone-Ghouls 
worship this beast, which they call the “Deep One”. 
Every week they sacrifice animals to it.
The Woman in the Tower: In the nest of the Trash 
Hawk, bones and other remains of the bird’s prey of 
are scattered, including the fresh corpse of Vorhan. 
One of the old skeletons is fairly intact, and still 
dressed in old and hacked up coveralls with strange 
markings. A PC who examines the skeleton and 
makes a Know the Zone roll, will realize that this 
is a skeleton of a non-mutated human woman. In 
her pocket, a waterlogged and yellowed diary can 
be found – it is still legible. This diary is an artifact 
that provides information about Eden. You can read 
more about it in Chapter 16.



--- PAGE 207

15
T HE  S MOKESTACK
T HE  C ON
TROL  RO
OM
2 0 5
Special Zone Sectors




--- PAGE 208

15
2 0 6
GAmemaster's Section
GEAR & ARTIFACTS
 K The members of the first water expedition 
have no grub or water at all, and are getting 
desperate.
 K Among the gory remains of the Stalker 
Vorhan’s body in the Trash Hawk’s nest, the 
PCs may find a scrap rifle (twin barrels, Gear 
Bonus +2), six bullets, three rations of canned 
food, five rations of clean water in plastic bot-
tles and one random artifact.
 K The dead woman in the nest on the smoke-
stack has the Diary artifact.
 K The Zone-Ghouls have dozens grub rations, 
but are not likely to share them with the PCs. 
Much of this grub is contaminated by Rot. 
The Zone-Ghouls have 1–2 random artifacts 
in their possession.
 K In the reservoirs there is a practically endless 
supply of clean water – the PCs just need to 
make sure they drink from the right vats…
EVENTS
 K The PCs are attacked by Zone-Ghouls soon 
after they set foot on the island. The Zone-
Ghouls are as many as the PCs, and try to 
ambush them (page 82). As soon as one of 
them suffers damage, they will retreat. They 
are not trying to kill the PCs (yet), just warn-
ing them and testing their mettle. If the fight 
goes very badly for the PCs, Nelma and her 
crew may come to the rescue.
 K The PCs find the remains of the first water 
expedition: Nelma, Grit and Lambda. They 
demand grub and water. They say that there 
are Zone-Ghouls on the island and want the 
PCs’ help to kill them or chase them off. First, 
Nelma wants someone to climb the smoke-
stack to see if their leader Vorhan is still alive. 
Nelma says that a “flying monster” grabbed 
him and flew off. Vorhan had grub and valu-
able artifacts that must be retrieved.
 K In the nest at the top of the smokestack 
the PCs will find Vorhan very much dead – 
hacked to pieces by the Trash Hawk. Among 
the remains, the PCs may find plenty of 
useful gear (above). Make sure the PCs also 
find the Diary on the dead woman. Nelma 



--- PAGE 209

15
2 0 7
Special Zone Sectors
demands that the PCs hand over everything 
they found in the nest, including the Diary. 
She will pass everything on to the Boss NN, 
she says.
 K The Trash Hawk attacks. The bird can strike 
when the PCs are up in the nest, on their way 
down, or at some other dramatically appropri-
ate time. The Trash Hawk can also attack the 
Zone-Ghouls. The bird will generally fly off 
when wounded and return later.
 K Nelma wants to attack the Zone-Ghouls head 
on, and secure the clean water in the pool 
halls. She demands that the PCs take part in 
the attack. Without the water in the pools the 
People are doomed, she says.
 K Lutrell leads a delegation to talk to the intrud-
ers. He is wary of the mutants’ powers and 
makes sure he stays at Short range. If the PCs 
can understand him (a Comprehend roll), he 
will make it clear that he offers them safe pas-
sage off the island with as much clean water 
as they can carry. In return, he wants their 
firearms and a vow that the People will never 
come back to this place. Nelma will never ac-
cept the deal, and the situation could escalate 
into violence.
 K The Zone-Ghouls attack in full force. This will 
only happen when Lutrell feels truly threat-
ened. The Zone-Ghouls greatly outnumber 
the intruders, who would do wisely to flee or 
negotiate – unless the PCs have very power-
ful artifacts or lots of Mutation Points.
 K Any violence in the pool halls wakes the 
Worm Swarm, which attacks everyone nearby. 
The Zone-Ghouls run for their lives from the 
Deep One. If the PCs have the right muta-
tions or powerful weapons they might be able 
to defeat the monster. The Zone-Ghouls have 
long feared the monster, and this event will 
make them very grateful to the PCs.
THE OTHER ARK
Sooner or later the People will realize that they are 
not the only mutants in the Zone – there are other 
Arks. All Arks share the same origin (Chapter 16), 
but have developed in very different directions over 
the years. Some have simply collapsed. This Special 
Zone Sector is an Ark that has survived – in its 
very own way.
The PCs can find their way here by chance or 
be led here as the result of a Threat Card or an 

--- PAGE 210

15
THE CHAIRMAN’S SUITE
THE ARTIFACT STOREROOM
2 0 8
GAmemaster's Section
The other Ark



--- PAGE 211

15
HAND-CRANKED ELEVATOR
PUSHWHEEL CONNECTED TO GENERATOR
SLAUGHTERHOUSE
CAGES FOR THE “GIVERS”
2 0 9
Special Zone Sectors
themselves. The second thing that the PCs will 
soon notice is that it is the women who call the 
shots around here – the men are underlings and 
slaves.
After having been gawked at by the children 
and guardedly greeted by the adults, the guests will 
be stripped of their clothes and scrubbed with hot 
water – a rather heavy-handed Rot decontamination 
(page 126). They are then offered grub, as much as 
they want, of some kind of dried meat. Any ques-
tions – about the meat or anything else – are met 
by silence or answers “not to worry about it”. The 
PCs hear about the “Chairman”, who seems to be 
the ruler of this Ark and is mentioned with deep 
reverence and respect. Some call him “the source 
of all life”.
The PCs are free to move around inside the set-
tlement, except for the basement and the Chair-
man’s penthouse (below), but are constantly being 
watched. Inside the building there is even working 
electric light, but the lamps flicker and sometimes 
go out completely.
THE SITUATION
The Chairman rules this Ark as a dictator. The 
source of his power is that he – and only he – can 
father children with the women of the Ark. All other 
men and women here are barren to each other, just 
like the People in the PCs’ own Ark. The explana-
tion behind this is that the Chairman is no mutant. 
He is a Zone-Ghoul who was adopted by Eden sci-
entists in this Ark at a young age – so long ago that 
none of the inhabitants remember it (or do they?). 
As a consequence of this, all other men in the Ark 
are treated like slaves (or worse, see below).
In this Ark, starvation set in much earlier than 
in the PCs’ Ark. To survive, the inhabitants went 
out into the Zone and started to hunt – and eat – 
Zone-Ghouls, who are numerous in this area. The 
hunting raids triggered violent counterattacks. A 
low-intensity war has now been raging for years 
between the Zone-Ghouls and the Chairman’s Ark.
When the Zone-Ghouls no longer were enough 
to feed the inhabitants – and the increasing number 
of children – the Chairman decreed that the men 
of the settl

--- PAGE 212

15
2 1 0
GAmemaster's Section
on. Many of the men are now dubbed “Givers” and 
work hard as slaves until they are butchered and 
eaten. But the number of Givers is running low, and 
discontent is simmering. When the Chairman hears 
about the PCs and their Ark he sees a new source 
of food for his ever-growing flock of children…
INHABITANTS
In this Ark, there are NPCs with the same roles as 
in the PCs own Ark – create stats for typical inhabit-
ants just like you would in the Ark (page 139). Stats 
for a few important NPCs follow below.
The Chairman  is consumed by his desire for power 
and control. He views himself as a divine being. He 
is skinny and pale, and wears a black robe and a 
hood to protect his translucent skin against the sun 
– which hurts him just like it does all Zone-Ghouls 
(page 176). The Chairman’s goal is to find a new 
source of grub for his children.
a ttributes:  Strength 3, Agility 4, Wits 5, Empathy 5. 
Skills:  Fight 2, Move 3, Shoot 4, Manipulate 5. 
g ea
r:  Revolver (artifact, 5 bullets).
Rebeth:  An Enforcer who is blindly loyal to the 
Chairman. She is tall, wears her black hair in a long 
ponytail and has no other goal than to prove herself 
to the Chairman.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 4, Wits 2, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Fight 4, Move 2, Shoot 3.
Mutations:  Four-Armed, Extreme Reflexes, 6 MP .
g ea
r:  scrap rifle (three-barreled, 6 bullets), spiked bat.



--- PAGE 213

15
2 1 1
Special Zone Sectors
Krin: A Stalker who secretly doubts the rule of the 
Chairman. She has not dared to tell anyone else – 
but she could try to use the PCs as a catalyst for 
a revolt.
a ttributes:  Strength 3, Agility 5, Wits 4, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Move 2, Shoot 4, Heal 2, Find the Path 2. 
Mutations:  Flame Breath, 3 MP .
g ea
r:  scrap rifle (weapon damage 3, 4 bullets), scrap knife.
Dink:  Krin’s slave and companion on her Zone trav-
els. He suspects that Krin doubts the Chairman, and 
considers ratting on her in order to gain favor with 
the Chairman and be spared the fate of a Giver.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 3, Wits 2, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Fight 2, Move 2, Endure 4. 
Mutations:  Rot-Eater, 1 MP .
g ea
r:  Scrap spear, road sign (artifact).
Naphta:  A Gearhead who prefers to spend her time 
alone, delving into the mysteries of the Old Age. 
Tries to stay away from trouble, but could be re-
cruited to either side in case of a revolt.
a ttributes:  Strength 2, Agility 3, Wits 5, Empathy 3.
Skills:  Fight 1, Shoot 3, Jury-Rig 3.
Mutations:  Pathokinesis, 3 MP .
g ea
r:  Bicycle chain, scrap pistol (twin-barreled, 4 bullets).
ARTIFACTS
This Ark has a sizeable collection of scrap and arti-
facts in the tower’s basement. In a dark garage there 
are lots of broken items from the Old Age, as well as 
4–5 functional artifacts. One of the artifacts leading 
the way to Eden (Chapter 16) may be located here.
In addition, in the garage there are three ancient 
buses that have been repaired and fitted with ar-
mor plating, flamethrowers and scrap cannons by 
Naphta. These rolling fortresses are sometimes 
used for larger raids against the Zone-Ghouls, and 
could be used against the PCs’ Ark.
GRUB, WATER & BULLETS
In this Ark there is enough dried meat (below) to 
feed all inhabitants for a week. Most of it is stored 
in the basement, where there is also a broken old 
water pipe that still carries enough Rot-free water 
for everyone to drink. The female inhabitants usu-
ally carry D6 bullets each, but there is no central 
stockpile. The men (except the Chairman) have no 
guns and no bullets.
EVENTS
 K The PCs are led to meet the Chairman in 
person. Th

--- PAGE 214

15
2 1 2
GAmemaster's Section
horizontal wheel pushed around by 5–6 Givers, 
hour after hour until they collapse. In another 
cold basement room, the darkest secret of this 
Ark is hidden – a slaughterhouse where Givers 
who are too exhausted to work are butchered 
for food. The entrance to the basement is 
guarded by two Enforcers with scrap pistols. 
The escape attempt can be the spark that trig-
gers a revolt against the Chairman, and the 
PCs might get caught in the middle of it.
 K If the PCs reveal where their Ark is located, or 
if the Chairman finds out some other way (by 
having the PCs followed, for example), he will 
lead a raiding party there. The three armored 
buses (above) will roll through Zone to the 
PCs Ark. If it is wintertime, then they can 
drive across frozen rivers or lakes. The raid 
has Battle Level 3 (page 114), but the Chair-
man doesn’t attack head on – instead he be-
sieges the Ark. He demands that ten mutants 
be handed over to him as slaves. If the People 
give in to this demand the Chairman will 
leave, but come back at some later time and 
demand even more “slaves”. Any slaves given 
to the Chairman will be turned into Givers (if 
they are men) or impregnated by the Chair-
man (if they are women). Sooner or later the 
People will need to confront the Chairman 
and deal with him once and for all.
THE NOVA CULT
In the world after the Fall, many strange cults have 
appeared. The psionic sect that calls itself “Nova” 
is one of the strangest – and most dangerous of 
them all.
OVERVIEW
In a flat scrubland in the Zone, there is a large cir-
cular metal slab, ten yards across, on the ground. 
Nearby, there are a few simple wooden sheds with 
corrugated metal roofs. From inside the sheds, ani-
mals can be heard grunting and squealing. Moving 
closer, the PCs smell animal manure. A hunchback 
mutant with reptilian features walks between the 
sheds (this is Ohm, see below). Inside the sheds 
about 30 pigs are kept, all mutated and surly.
On occasion (i.e. at a moment of your choosing) 
the large metal slab will slide away with a loud scrap-
ing noise. A deep rumble rises from the underground 
silo that is revealed, and a plume of steam a

--- PAGE 215

15
2 1 3
Special Zone Sectors
born, but none of them have been luminescent so 
far. The fanatical Plutonia has forced the mothers 
to leave the infants to die in the Zone. Now, the 
young priestess Abbetina (below) is pregnant, and 
has decided that she will never let Plutonia take her 
child from her.
Plutonia believes that Abbetina bears the lumi-
nescent child and that the Doomsday will come soon. 
She has managed to start up the missile launch sys-
tem, and is now considering an appropriate target for 
this weapon of mass destruction. In the meantime, 
several cult members are starting to question Pluto-
nia’s leadership. She has responded by handing out 
“holy pills” (sedatives), to make the cult members 
more docile. But this state of affairs cannot last…
INHABITANTS
The first creatures the PCs meet in this Zone sector 
are probably Ohm and his surly mutant hogs, that 
he keeps for the cult. The Nova Cult itself has 20 
members. Mostly, they stay down in their under-
ground “temple” where they meditate and study 
artifacts from the Old Age. Sometimes, they go on 
patrols in the Zone, to leave infants to die (above 
and page 173) or to search for artifacts.
All Nova Cult members have shaved heads and 
wear long robes. Some adorn themselves with glit-
tering items they have found in the Zone. A few 
wield simple scrap weapons like spears and knives, 
but most are unarmed. All cult members are power-
ful psionic mutants. For stats, see page 174.
Ohm, Pig Farmer. A large, reptilian hunchbacked 
mutant with a cloven tongue. He moves jerkily, 
speaks with a lisp and is dressed in blue coveralls. 
He has followed Plutonia from the start, but he is 
not accepted as a full member of the cult as he does 
not have any psionic mutations. He is sick of being 
treated like a second-rate mutant, and might take 
the chance to get back at the cultists, given the 
chance. Deep inside, he still loves Plutonia however. 
And his hogs.
a ttributes:  Strength 5, Agility 3, Wits 3, Empathy 2.
Skills:  Fight 3, Move 2.
Mutations:  Reptilian, 3 MP .
g ea
r:  Scrap knife, gas mask (artifact).
Plutonia , Cult Leader. Tall and anemic woman with a 
shaved head. Walks with regal stride

--- PAGE 216

15
O HM ’ S  P IG S TY
C UL
T  H EA
D q UA
RTERS
2 1 4
GAmemaster's Section
The Nova Cult
scattered throughout the bunker. Let the players 
draw random Artifact Cards, or choose something 
appropriate from Chapter 14. It might even be one 
of the artifacts leading the way to Eden (Chapter 16).
The missile in the silo is of course also an arti-
fact. However, it is set up within the silo and next 
to impossible to remove. It is launched by a launch 
key (carried by Plutonia at all times) and a simple 
six-digit code (which only Plutonia knows). The de-
structive power of the missile warhead is horren-
dous. In the sector where it strikes, and in all eight 
surrounding sectors, all buildings are leveled and 
all life wiped out. Anyone within ten sectors of the 
detonation suffer a Rot attack – the number of Rot 
Points immediately suffered is equal to 10 minus 
the distance to the detonation sector. This entire 
area is then contaminated and all sectors within it 
suffer from Rot Level 2 (Chapter 8).
GRUB & WATER
In locked cabinets, there is grub enough to feed 
the cult for a week. There is meat from the pigs, 
some grub grown by Ohm, and some canned food 
from the Old Age. Only Plutonia has the key to 
the cabinets. Clean water, enough to last a week, is 
stored in plastic jerrycans and bottles scattered in 
the underground complex.
EVENTS
Present the Nova cultists as aloof and mysterious. 
They can show up in many places and be enemies 
as well as allies to the People. See the Threat Card 
The Zone Cult (Chapter 10) and the Zone threat 
Nova Cultists (Chapter 13) for examples of how the 
PCs can come into contact with the cult. They can 
also hear about the cult from NPCs that they meet 
when traveling in the Zone. When the PCs have 
found their way to the cult’s headquarters, many 
things might happen:
 K A PC with the Luminescence mutation would 
be seen as a holy creature by the cultists. 
They all kneel in reverence, handing the PC 
scrap and artifacts as gifts. It is up to the PCs 
how they wish to handle the situation. Pluto-
nia will feel threatened by the newcomers and 
might resort to drastic action.



--- PAGE 217

15
M ISSILE  S ILO
2 1 5
Special Zone Sectors




--- PAGE 218

15
2 1 6
GAmemaster's Section
 K If the PCs come into conflict with Nova, Plu-
tonia wants them captured and questioned 
to find out if they have seen any unmutated 
humans anywhere. After the interrogation – 
whatever answers the PCs give – they will be 
chained in the missile silo to be incinerated 
when the missile is launched.
 K Abbetina turns to the PCs for help to get rid 
of Plutonia – and kill her if necessary. Abbet-
ina may free the PCs if they have been cap-
tured. She may even take this initiative if she 
meets the PCs somewhere else, for example 
in the Ark. In this case she might offer some 
reward in the return for their help, such as a 
clue to the location of Eden.
 K Plutonia suddenly decrees that the Dooms-
day will take place in just a few days. The 
cult assembles in the temple and chants 
incessantly. The PCs show up at the bunker, 
or are already there. Do they try to stop her? 
If pressed, Plutonia may very well launch the 
missile even if Abbetina hasn’t given birth 
yet. You decide what target Plutonia chooses, 
if the missile lands somewhere in the Zone or 
far away – perhaps hitting someone who will 
retaliate?



--- PAGE 219

15
2 1 7
Special Zone Sectors
THE HELLDRIVERS
The Helldrivers are a gasoline-guzzling mutant clan 
that the PCs can meet by the Ark (see the Threat 
Card described in Chapter 10) or out in the Zone 
(page 173). This Special Zone Sector describes the 
Helldrivers’ main base of operations.
OVERVIEW
Even at a distance, the silhouette of a large, cubi-
cal building can be seen against the horizon. The 
building consists of eight open floors, with rows of 
vehicles and wrecks seen on every floor.
In the rubble around the main building, there 
are a number of sheds, motorhomes, tents and ve-
hicle wrecks turned into living quarters. There is 
also a large metal cage with crude spectator stands 
on either side. Several dozens of people – most with 
colorful mohawk haircuts and black leather out-
fits – mill about the area. Some are busy tinkering 
with their vehicles, some lift weights and others 
sit by a fire, eating. The rumble of engines is heard 
constantly.
The entire compound is encircled by a barbed-
wire fence. At some points on the fence, red STOP-
signs are mounted. Here and there, decomposing 
remains of humanoids and animals lie on the 
ground. The stench of death is pungent.
THE SITUATION
This settlement is the home of the Helldrivers, and 
band of rough and tumble mutants who have been 
exiled from their Arks (or left voluntarily). They 
are led by Ilona the Corpse-Eater who first found 
this old car park, packed with working vehicles. 
Using these, the Helldrivers have raided other 
settlements in the Zone, increasing their number 
and improving their weaponry over the years. The 
basement levels of the car park are filled with loot 
from these raids. The Helldrivers have also taken 
slaves, who now toil as chain-gang servants to the 
Helldrivers.
Ilona the Corpse-Eater is a large mutant who 
has killed every rival who has tried to challenge her 
leadership. She rules her horde with an iron fist – 
the only way to control such an unruly bunch. Most 
Helldrivers are violent and impulsive types, driven 
by hatred and bitterness. Violent internal rivalry is 
common. Lately, the supply of food and slaves has 
been running low, and the Helldrivers are getti

--- PAGE 220

15
ILONA’S ARMOR-PLATED TRAILER
HELLDRIVER CARS
GUARD ON THE ROOF
2 1 8
GAmemaster's Section
The Helldrivers


